Page 1: 5/11/24, 4:35 PM About the Safe Water Program | EHS | CDC.

r DC Centers for Disease
betes Control and Prevention

About the Safe Water Program

CDC's Safe Water program provides the following services to public health departments, particularly environmental
health programs:

e Offering free, evidence-based guidance, tools, and training.

e Providing technical assistance to help programs address unique challenges in their jurisdictions.

e Building environmental health capacity to address water hazards using data-driven, evidence-based approaches.
Environmental health programs work to provide safe water in their communities by

e Addressing problems with private drinking water systems such as wells.

e Identifying hazards through permitting and inspecting drinking water and wastewater systems, public swimming
pools, waterparks, and other venues.

e Responding to and preventing outbreaks of Legionnaires’ disease.

e Filling crucial functions during emergencies such as testing water supplies and assessing shelters and other facilities.

Page last reviewed: January 6, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/about-safe-water.html

11



Page 2: 5/11/24, 2:25 PM About the Vessel Sanitation Program | VSP | CDC
Espafiol | Other Languages

r Centers for Disease
DC Control and Prevention

Vessel Sanitation Program Home

About the Vessel Sanitation Program

What does VSP do?

The Vessel Sanitation Program (VSP) at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) assists the cruise ship industry
to prevent and control the introduction, transmission, and spread of gastrointestinal (Gl) illnesses on cruise ships. VSP
operates under the authority of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. Section 264 Quarantine and Inspection Regulations to
Control Communicable Diseases).

We accomplish our mission by

e Inspecting cruise ships in periodic, unannounced operational sanitation inspections.

e Reviewing ship construction plans for compliance with VSP's sanitary design criteria standards.
e Monitoring gastrointestinal illnesses and investigating or responding to outbreaks.

e Training cruise ship employees on public health practices.

e Providing health education and reliable and current public health information to the cruise ship industry, the traveling
public, public health professionals, state and local health authorities, and the media.

See eaae Saeaaga

Which cruise ships are under VSP’s jurisdiction?

Cruise ships under VSP jurisdiction

e Carry 13 or more passengers and

e Have a foreign itinerary with U.S. ports.

How does VSP operate?

The program operates by the public health standards that can be found in the current version of the VSP Operations Manual.
These criteria target the control and prevention of gastrointestinal illnesses on cruise ships and are primarily based on
standards found in the FDA Food Code[4 and the World Health Organization's Guide to Ship Sanitation. (4

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/aboutvsp.htm 1/2



Page 3: 5/11/24, 2:25 PM About the Vessel Sanitation Program | VSP | CDC

VSP periodically updates the VSP Operations Manua/ to reflect new technologies, current food science, disease patterns and
trends, and emerging pathogens.

How are VSP’s inspection fees structured?

Cruise ship owners pay a fee based on the ship's size for operational inspections or reinspections. The fee schedule is
posted in the Federal Register.[4 Learn more about periodic operational sanitation inspections and fees.

Cruise ship owners pay a fee based on the ship's size for onsite construction and renovation inspections. The fee schedule
is posted in the Federal Register. [4 VSP does not charge a fee for plan reviews or consultations related to renovations or
new cruise ships. Learn about cruise ship construction inspections and equipment reviews, how to request them, and
construction inspection fees.

How can | contact VSP?

e Visit CDC-INFO
¢ Call (800) 323-2132

Mailing address: Vessel Sanitation Program
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
4770 Buford Highway, $106-6

Atlanta, GA 30341

Media inquiries

What CDC/ATSDR divisions and programs does VSP work with?

e Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR)
© Geospatial Research, Analysis, and Services Program (GRASP)

e National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases (NCEZID)
© CDC Travelers’ Health

© Division of Global Migration and Quarantine
© Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria

e National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD)
° Division of Viral Diseases

e National Respiratory and Enteric Virus Surveillance System (NREVSS)
Last Reviewed: January 8, 2024

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/aboutvsp.htm



Page 4: 5/11/24, 1:56 PM About Unusual Patterns of Cancer | NCEH | CDC
Espafiol | Other Languages

CDC Centers for Disease —
Y Control and Prevention

Unusual Patterns of Cancer, the Environment, and Community Concerns Home

About Unusual Patterns of Cancer

Unusual Patterns of Cancer

Cancer is a group of diseases in which some of the body's cells grow uncontrollably and spread to other parts of the body.
As a group, cancers are very common. Given the frequency with which cancers are diagnosed, sometimes situations arise
where an unusual number of cancers are diagnosed among people in a particular location. These unusual numbers may
be from chance, or they may result from the following:

e Different cancer screening practices

e Different access to health care, which may reflect other social and economic factors
e Genetic susceptibility to a particular cancer

e Behavioral risks and social determinants of health

¢ Occupational exposures

¢ Environmental exposures

Although the causes of many cancers are unknown, some causal relationships have been shown between environmental
exposures and development of cancer in specific organs (for example, exposure to asbestos and the development of
mesothelioma).

Investigating Unusual Patterns of Cancer

State, tribal, local, and territorial health departments respond to reports of unusual patterns of cancer. Usually, health
departments start by gathering information about the unusual pattern of cancer, including the expected cancer rate,
types of cancer, number of cases, and the age, sex, race, address, occupation, and age at diagnosis of the people with
cancer,

CDC/ATSDR has created a decision-making tool B§ [PDF - 169 KB] that can be used by health departments for
determining the need to further assess an unusual pattern of cancer. The tool contains a set of criteria that can be used
to assess the cancer(s) of concern and/or related environmental risk factors. These criteria promote further assessment
of unusual patterns of cancer that may not always meet the formal definition of a cancer cluster.

For additional information on how unusual patterns of cancer are investigated, see Guidelines for Examining Unusual
Patterns of Cancer and Environmental Concerns.

Cancer Clusters

Some unusual patterns of cancer are considered a cancer cluster. A cancer cluster is defined as a greater than expected
number of the same or etiologically related cancer cases that occurs within a group of people in a geographic area over a
defined period of time.

This definition can be further understood as follows:

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/cancer-environment/about.html



Page 5: 5/11/24, 1:56 PM About Unusual Patterns of Cancer | NCEH | CDC

e Agreater than expected number: When the number of observed cases is greater than typically observed in a similar
setting.

e Of the same or etiologically related cancer cases: Cases are of the same type, are within a family of tumors (for
example, Ewing's family of tumors [4 ), or have a known or suggested link to the same specific environmental or
chemical exposures. It is possible to consider multiple cancer types when such a known exposure (for example,
radiation or a specific chemical) is linked to more than one cancer type or when more than one contaminant or
exposure type has been identified.

e Within a group of people: The population in which the cancer cases are occurring is defined by its demographic
factors (for example, race/ethnicity, age, and sex).

e Ina geographic area: The geographic area may be based upon pre-existing geopolitical boundaries (for example,
census tract, county, or ZIP code/ZIP code tabulation area). It may be defined according to the nature and extent of
potential exposures that may cross multiple or partial boundaries. For example, air pollution from a hazardous waste
incinerator which may cross multiple counties or census tracts. These geographic boundaries are used to determine
the number of cancer cases as they relate to the total population in this predefined area. It is possible to create or
obscure a cluster inadvertently by modifying the area of interest.

e Over a defined period of time: The time frame used to establish the beginning and end dates for analysis. The time
period chosen for analysis will affect both the total cases observed and the calculation of the expected incidence of
cancer in the population.

Etiology refers to causes and risk factors associated with the development of disease. For example, exposure to the sun
can cause skin cancer.

It is important to note that not every unusual pattern of cancer will meet the above definition of a cancer cluster. Unusual
patterns of cancer that meet some of the criteria described above and also have plausible environmental concerns still
warrant further evaluation or assessment by local or state health departments.

Reporting Cancer Concerns

If you suspect your community or workplace may be experiencing more cases of cancer than expected, or if you'd like
information such as cancer statistics or trends in your area, contact your state, tribal, local, or territorial health
department or state/territory cancer registry. A state, tribal, local, or territorial health department provides the first
response to reports of unusual patterns of cancer. For information about cancer in the workplace, please see the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health website.

If you suspect that your community or workplace may be experiencing more cancer than expected, contact your state,
tribal, local, or territorial health department or state/territory cancer registry.

Questions Regarding Unusual Patterns of Cancer

State, tribal, local, and territorial health departments, along with cancer registries, respond to questions about unusual
patterns of cancer occurrences in their area and have the most current local data.

The federal role in responding to unusual patterns of cancer is limited. As needed, state, tribal, local, or territorial health
departments may request technical assistance in response to unusual patterns of cancer from CDC/ATSDR. CDC/ATSDR
may provide technical recommendations and make referrals to the appropriate state, tribal, local, or territorial health
department or cancer registry.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/cancer-environment/about.html



Page 6: 5/11/24, 1:56 PM About Unusual Patterns of Cancer | NCEH | CDC

ATSDR is directed by congressional mandate to perform specific functions concerning the effect on public health of
hazardous substances in the environment. These functions include public health assessments of waste sites, health
consultations concerning specific hazardous substances, health surveillance and registries, response to emergency

releases of hazardous substances, applied research in support of public health assessments, information development
and dissemination, and education and training concerning hazardous substances.

Contact your state, tribal, local, or territorial health department or state/territory cancer registry for inquiries regarding
unusual patterns of cancer being investigated in your community.

Reducing Your Risk of Developing Cancer

In general, cancers have a variety of risk factors related to behavioral, lifestyle, occupational, and environmental risks. For
many cancers, you can reduce your risk of developing cancer by adopting a healthy lifestyle that includes avoiding
tobacco use, excessive alcohol consumption, and sun exposure; increasing physical activity; maintaining a recommended
body weight; and eating a healthy and nutritious diet. Taking advantage of cancer screening also will reduce your risk.

For more information about preventing cancer, visit the following websites

e CDC's Division of Cancer Prevention and Control
e The National Institute of Health’s National Cancer Institute 4

e American Cancer Society 4

Last Reviewed: December 8, 2022

How helpful was this page?

wwwww

Not helpful Very helpful

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/cancer-environment/about.html

3/3



Page 7: 5/11/24, 2:26 PM About VSP Construction Inspections | VSP | CDC
Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Vessel Sanitation Program Home

Construction Inspections

Learn about cruise ship construction inspections and equipment reviews and how to request them.

What are the VSP Construction Guidelines?

Cruise ship owners and operators select ship design and equipment that best meet their needs. The selected design and
equipment must also meet VSP’s sanitary design criteria standards and routine operational inspection requirements.

The VSP Construction Guidelines provide a framework of consistent construction and design guidelines to help protect
passenger and crew health. VSP is committed to promoting high construction standards to protect the public's health.

The guidelines cover components of a cruise vessel's facilities related to public health, including

e Food storage, preparation, and service.
e Water bunkering, storage, disinfection, and distribution.

e Recreational water facility design and construction.

The first guidelines for construction of cruise ships were published in 1997 and 2001 as the Recommended Shipbuilding
Construction Guidelines for Cruise Vessels Destined to Call on U.S. Ports. In 2005, the guidelines were renamed the VSP
Construction Guidelines.

How can a ship request plan reviews, consultations, and
construction-related inspections?

Cruise vessel owners or shipyards that build or renovate cruise vessels can request plan reviews, onsite shipyard construction
inspections, and/or final construction inspections of new or renovated vessels before their first or next operational inspection.
To coordinate or schedule a plan review or construction-related inspection,

e Submit an official written request to the VSP Chief at vsp@cdc.gov as early as possible in the planning, construction, or
renovation process. VSP honors requests depending on staff availability.

e Make your request more than 45 days before the desired date(s). VSP encourages coordination well before the 45-day
minimum to better plan the actual dates.

At least one representative qualified to answer questions and empowered to make corrections, additions, or deletions must
attend plan reviews and construction-related inspections. Consult the VSP Construction Guidelines for more information.

What's involved in the construction and renovation process?

At the cruise industry's request, VSP provides consultation during cruise ship construction and renovation. We analyze the
ship’s design during plan reviews to eliminate environmental health risks and to incorporate modifications that create healthy
environments.

VSP involvement may include

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/about_construction.htm



Page 8: 5/11/24, 2:26 PM

About VSP Construction Inspections | VSP | CDC

e Review of construction/renovation plans.

e Technical support through emails and phone calls.

e Shipyard inspections.

e Final construction inspections.

Construction plan reviews are based on the current VSP Construction Guidelines. VSP generally focuses on five areas during

these reviews:

General Areas
Equipment and facilities
Food areas

Warewashing and waste
management

Swimming pools and spas

Water systems

Inspectors Look At
Standards, parts, and placements and hygiene requirements
Buffet lines, galleys, provision rooms, refrigerators, bar areas, and dining rooms

Proper setup and handling

Drains, pumps, filters, safety, and disinfection

Bunkering, storage, distribution, disinfection, and cross-connections/backflow
prevention

How much do construction/renovation plan reviews cost?

Cruise ship owners pay a fee based on the ship's size for onsite construction and renovation inspections. The fee for
construction and renovation inspections is higher than the fee for operational inspections or reinspections because these

inspections typically last several days instead of 1 day.

NOTE: VSP charges a fee for onsite construction and renovation inspections. However, VSP does not charge a fee for plan

reviews or consultations related to renovations or new cruise ships.

Fee Schedule, January 1, 2023-September 30, 2023

Fee Schedule for Each Vessel Size—Construction/Renovation Inspections

Vessel Size (GRT")

Extra Small (<3,000 GRT)

Small (3,001-15,000 GRT)
Medium (15,001-30,000 GRT)
Large (30,001-60,000 GRT)

Extra Large (60,001-120,000 GRT)
Mega (>120,001-140,000 GRT)

Super Mega (>140,001 GRT)

Inspection Fee
US$2,990
US$5,980
US$11,960
US$17,940
US$23,920
US$35,880

US$47,840

1Gross register tonnage in cubic feet, as shown in Lloyd's Register of Shipping.

The fee schedule is also posted in the Federal Register. 4

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/about_construction.htm

2/3



Page 9: 5/11/24, 2:26 PM About VSP Construction Inspections | VSP | CDC

What equipment has VSP tested and certified?

Although the VSP Construction Guidelines establish standards for equipment and materials installed on cruise vessels, VSP
does not test, certify, or otherwise endorse or approve any equipment or materials used by the cruise industry. Instead, VSP
recognizes certification from independent testing laboratories such as the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF), Underwriter’s

Laboratories (UL), the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), and other recognized independent international testing
institutions.

Equipment manufacturers and suppliers should not contact VSP to request approval of their products.

VSP grants cruise line requests for equipment reviews depending on staff availability. Submit an official written request to the

VSP Chief at vsp@cdc.gov to request reviews.
Last Reviewed: December 1, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/about_construction.htm

3/3



Page 10: 5/11/24, 2:25 PM About VSP Inspections | VSP | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

C Centers for Disease
b,, DC Control and Prevention

Vessel Sanitation Program

Vessel Sanitation Program Home

Operational Inspections

Learn how and why VSP conducts operational sanitation inspections.

Why does the Vessel Sanitation Program (VSP) conduct
operational sanitation inspections?

VSP inspectors conduct operational sanitation inspections to determine how well ships are operating and maintaining
sanitation standards in accordance with the current VSP Operations Manual.

Inspectors provide public health guidance to cruise ship staff when standards are out of compliance.

Inspections are unannounced, and they are done while a ship is in a U.S. port.

What do VSP inspectors do during a periodic sanitation
inspection?

Depending on the size of the ship, two to five inspectors examine the ship to see if it complies with the public health
standards found in the current VSP Operations Manual. Inspections usually take 6-8 hours, depending on the number of
inspectors, ship size, amount of time the ship is in port, and issues identified during the inspection.

VSP inspects eight major areas on ships

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/about_inspections.htm



Page 11: 5/11/24, 2:25 PM

About VSP Inspections | VSP | CDC

VESSEL SANITATION PROGRAM

KEEPING YOU 2.7/7
ON THE HIGH SEAS. 7

Click here to see the eight major areas VSP inspects in ships.

Major Areas VSP Inspects
on a Ship

Medical facilities

Potable water systems

Swimming pools and
whirlpool spas

Galleys and dining rooms

Child activity centers

Hotel accommodations

Ventilation systems

Common areas of the ship

Inspectors Look At

Documentation for gastrointestinal illness surveillance
Medical logs

Procedures from water source to storage until use
Water distribution

Protection and any cross-connections

Disinfection process

Filtration

Disinfection

General maintenance
Safety

Food protection during sourcing, provisioning, storage, preparation, and service
Employee health and personal hygiene
Facility equipment maintenance and dishwashing

Properly equipped diaper changing stations, toilets, and handwashing stations
Facility disinfection
Infection control for ill children

Routine cleaning sequences and infection control procedures during outbreaks of
gastrointestinal illness, including the use of appropriate disinfectants and outbreak policies

System maintenance
System cleaning

Integrated pest management strategies
General cleanliness
Maintenance

At the end of each inspection, VSP inspectors meet with ship management to discuss inspection violations and give them a
draft inspection report. Within 2 weeks of the inspection, VSP sends a final copy of the inspection report to the ship's cruise

line.

How often are ships inspected?

Cruise ships under VSP’s jurisdiction are subject to two inspections each year. If a ship sails outside of the United States for an

extended period, it may not be inspected twice a year, but it will be inspected again when it returns to the United States.

Do ships know when the inspection will occur?

No. The twice-yearly inspections are unannounced.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/about_inspections.htm

2/4



Page 12: 5/11/24, 2:25 PM About VSP Inspections | VSP | CDC

How are cruise ships scored?

Cruise ships are scored on a 100-point scale. Inspection criteria are defined in the current VSP Operations Manual. Criteria are
assigned a point value; points are deducted from the score when there is a pattern of similar violations of the same criteria or
when there is a single, significant violation.

Points are deducted from that score based on public health significance. An 85 or below is a failing score. All scores are
posted on the VSP website.

Are ships required to correct violations found during inspections?

Yes. Although ships are responsible for correcting all violations, some critical violations must be corrected immediately. Each
ship submits a corrective action statement describing how the violations were corrected.

Some violations can be corrected during the inspection; others may take longer to correct.

What happens if a ship fails an inspection?

Ships that fail inspections are reinspected within a reasonable time period.

When would VSP recommend that a ship not sail?

An inspection failure does not warrant a no-sail recommendation unless there is an imminent public health risk.
VSP may recommend that the ship not sail if there are imminent public health risks including the following:

e Inability to properly chlorinate potable (drinking) water.

Inability to keep food within safe temperatures.
e Inadequate facilities for cleaning and sanitizing food equipment.

¢ Inability to properly dispose of solid or liquid waste.

VSP may also recommend a ship not sail during an infectious disease outbreak where continuing normal operations may
subject newly arriving passengers to disease.

If a cruise line refuses to follow a VSP no-sail recommendation, it can become a no-sail order.

Where can | find inspection scores and reports?

Inspection reports and scores as well as corrective action statements are available on the VSP website.

How much do inspections cost?

Cruise ship owners pay a fee based on the ship's size for operational inspections and reinspections.
Fees

Fee Schedule, January 1, 2023-September 30, 2023

Fee Schedule for Each Vessel Size—Operations Inspections

Vessel Size (GRT") Inspection Fee

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/about_inspections.htm 3/4



Page 13: 5/11/24, 2:25 PM About VSP Inspections | VSP | CDC

Extra Small (<3,000 GRT) US$1,495
Small (3,001-15,000 GRT) US$2,990
Medium (15,001-30,000 GRT) US$5,980
Large (30,001-60,000 GRT) US$8,970
Extra Large (60,001-120,000 GRT) US$11,960
Mega (>120,001-140,000 GRT) US$17,940
Super Mega (>140,001 GRT) US$23,920

‘Gross register tonnage in cubic feet, as shown in Lloyd’s Register of Shipping.

The fee schedule is also posted in the Federal Register. 4
Last Reviewed: January 4, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/about_inspections.htm

44



Page 14: 5/11/24, 2:28 PM About VSP Outbreak Investigations | VSP | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

CDC Centers for Disease —
Y Control and Prevention

Vessel Sanitation Program Home

VSP Outbreak Investigations

Learn what we do during investigations of gastrointestinal illness outbreaks on cruise ships.

The Vessel Sanitation Program (VSP) monitors our surveillance system to observe illness patterns for gastrointestinal illness
on cruise ships.

VSP conducts outbreak investigations when 3% or more of the ship's passengers or crew members report they are sick with
symptoms of gastrointestinal illness. We may also conduct an outbreak investigation if an unusual gastrointestinal illness
pattern or characteristic is found (even if the illness rate is less than 3%).

We conduct outbreak investigations on ships sailing in the United States or within 15 days of arriving at a U.S. port.

What does VSP do in an outbreak investigation?

During an outbreak investigation, VSP works with cruise ship staff and the cruise line to determine the cause of illness.

When an outbreak occurs, we ask for logs and records, including gastrointestinal illness surveillance logs, so we can closely
examine the reported cases. The surveillance logs include information such as specific symptoms and the date and time the
illness occurred. By reviewing the logs, we can determine the following:

e How many passengers and crew are sick on the ship.
e When illness started and how long it lasted.
e¢ How many people are sick on each day of the voyage.

e Symptoms of people who are sick.
The objectives of an investigation are to

e Determine the magnitude of illness aboard the ship.

e Identify the pathogen causing the illness.

Identify risk factors associated with the illness.

e Formulate control measures to prevent or stop the spread of illness.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/about_investigations.htm



Page 15: 5/11/24, 2:28 PM About VSP Outbreak Investigations | VSP | CDC

By determining the cause of an outbreak, VSP can help the cruise line develop effective intervention strategies to prevent a
recurrence of the outbreak.

During an outbreak, VSP staff may board a cruise ship to do one or more of the following:

e Epidemiologic assessment to look at the spread or pattern of gastrointestinal illness, interview passengers and crew
members, and analyze questionnaires with details on recent crew and passenger activities.

e Targeted environmental health assessment to investigate specific areas to check for exposure and routes of illness
transmission and to monitor the ship's outbreak prevention and response plan procedures. Targeted environmental
health assessments are based on preliminary findings from the epidemiologic assessment. For example, if water is
suspected as the source of illness, VSP gives more attention to reviewing places on and off the ship where people could
have been exposed to contaminated water.

e Laboratory investigation to confirm the cause of illness. Medical staff may collect stool, vomit, or blood specimens to
send to a land-based laboratory.

What does VSP require cruise lines to do during outbreaks?

Cruise lines are required to activate their outbreak prevention and response plans and make every effort to gain control of
the outbreak. These plans

e Indicate trigger points that initiate a ship's response to cases of illness.
e Identify overall outbreak management strategies.

e Include detailed infection control procedures for each area of the ship.
Cruise line control measures include the following:

e Increasing daily cleaning and disinfection frequencies.

e Stopping high-risk activities, such as self-service buffets and handshaking.

e Isolating ill people.

¢ Collecting clinical and/or environmental specimens for analysis.

e Providing daily updates to VSP that include case counts and reports of what the ship has done to establish control.
e Alerting passengers and crew of the illnesses onboard.

e Providing information about proper handwashing.

e Notifying new passengers about the outbreak before they get on the ship.
VSP may also ask cruise lines to

e Notify port authorities.
e Delay bringing passengers on board for the next voyage.

e Establish cleaning and disinfection procedures in terminal buildings.

Where can | find information about a specific outbreak?

We post all outbreak summaries on our website.

How can | protect myself from gastrointestinal illness?

e Use proper handwashing techniques throughout your voyage, but especially after using the bathroom and before eating.
e Avoid any food or water that you think may be contaminated.
e Avoid raw or undercooked shellfish.

e Avoid unnecessary direct hand contact with surfaces such as public toilet room door handles.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/about_investigations.htm

2/3



Page 16: 5/11/24, 2:28 PM About VSP Outbreak Investigations | VSP | CDC

e Avoid unnecessary close contact with ill persons.

e See our tips for healthy cruising.
Last Reviewed: January 5, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/about_investigations.htm 3/3



Page 17: 5/11/24, 2:32 PM Acute Gastroenteritis (AGE) on Cruise Ships, 2006-2019 | NCEH | CDC

aay Centers for Disease —
Control and Prevention

Acute Gastroenteritis (AGE) on Cruise Ships, 2006-2019

Maritime Illness Database and Reporting System
Gastrointestinal illness can spread quickly in closed and semienclosed environments, such as cruise ships, but rates of

AGE illness on passenger cruise ships have significantly decreased over time.

e Data 2006-2019

HEALTH DEPARTMENTS:
This report can be used to inform the public about
how to avoid Gl illness while on cruises

CDC.gov bit.ly/ss7006a1

From 2006 through 2019, approximately 127 million passengers sailed on 252 cruise ships in the Vessel Sanitation
Program's (VSP) jurisdiction. The rate of AGE illness on cruise ships decreased during 2006-2019 for passengers and crew.

e Illness rates among passengers increased on larger ships and on voyages longer than 7 days.

e Illness rates among crew were higher on larger ships and on voyages lasting >5 days.

Ship size and voyage length are associated with AGE illness, and more targeted effort is needed to prevent unequal illness
rates among passengers and crew.

VSP defines AGE illness as

e Three or more loose stools within a 24-hour period or what is more than normal for the individual, OR

¢ Vomiting along with one of the following symptoms:
o diarrhea, or

© bloody stool, or

o muscle ache, or

o headache, or

© abdominal cramps, or

© fever.
Decreasing numbers of AGE outbreaks on cruise ships are likely a result of several factors:

e The evolution of environmental health sanitation standards established in 1975 by VSP and enforced during VSP ship
inspections.

e Cruise industry practices such as
© implementation of hygiene standards,

© availability of handwashing stations in public areas on ships, and

° health screening of passengers and crew before embarkation.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/pub/age-2006-2019.htm

1/2



Page 18: 5/11/24, 2:32 PM Acute Gastroenteritis (AGE) on Cruise Ships, 2006-2019 | NCEH | CDC

Help Limit the Spread of Acute Gastroenteritis
Report your illness if you're sick.
© * Cal the ships emedical toclity 1 roee as posite
nad fellow the medical staff recommendations
Wash your hands often, especially after =_
tesing the toilet and before eating of drinking. a}
a Take care of yourself.
* Get plenty of rest and érimk plenty of water,
Testang Mipsrebel yout anna ites
-Deahing wetes helps pore Gedy ration.
Leave the area if you see someone get sick
(vomiting or diarrhea).
= Report to erase staff if they are met alveady menee.

You can help limit the spread of AGE by

e Reporting your illness if you're sick.

© Call the ship's medical facility as soon as possible and follow the medical staff's recommendations. Reporting your
illness

= allows ship management to know if they need to increase cleaning,

= allows ship staff to isolate ill passengers to prevent transmission, and

= lets VSP know if an outbreak is occurring on the ship.
©° Washing your hands often, especially after using the toilet and before eating or drinking.
© Taking care of yourself.

= Get plenty of rest and drink plenty of water.
= Resting helps rebuild your immune system.

= Drinking water helps prevent dehydration.

= Leaving the area if you see someone get sick (vomiting or diarrhea) and reporting it to cruise staff if they are
not already aware.

Related Links

Jenkins KA, Vaughan GH Jr, Rodriguez LO, Freeland A. Acute gastroenteritis on cruise ships — Maritime Illness Database
and Reporting System, United States, 2006-2019. MMWR Surv. Summ. 2021;70(6):1-9.

Freeland AL, Vaughan GH Jr, Banerjee SN. Acute gastroenteritis on cruise ships—United States, 2008-2014. MMWR.
2016;65(1):1-5.

Cramer EH, Blanton C, Browne L, Vaughan G, Bopp C, Forney D. Epidemiology of gastroenteritis on cruise ships, 2001-
2004: the impact of noroviruses. [4 Am J Prev Med. 2006;30(3):252-7.

Cramer EH, Gu DX, Durbin RE, Vessel Sanitation Program Environmental Health Inspection Team. Diarrheal disease on
cruise ships, 1990-2000: the impact of environmental health programs. [4 Am J Prev Med. 2003;24(3):227-33.

Page last reviewed: September 28, 2021

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/pub/age-2006-2019.htm 2/2



Page 19: 5/11/24, 3:51 PM Acute Toxic Substance Releases | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

CDC Centers for Disease
i Control and Prevention

Acute Toxic Substance Releases

We Track That

The toxic substance release data on the Tracking Network are from the Agency for Toxic Substance and Disease Registry’s
(ATSDR) National Toxic Substance Incident Program (NTSIP). Surveillance allows for a better understanding of the causes of
incidents and injures, which can help public health officials focus prevention efforts and prepare for future toxic substance
emergencies.

Types of Data

The acute toxic substance releases data provides information about the number of reported acute toxic substance releases in
the United States. The advanced options allow you to explore patterns related to the types of incidents, primary contributing
factors, and type of area where the incident occurred.

Acute Toxic Substance Releases

This indicator shows the number of reported incidents, the percent of incidents with at least one injury or fatality, the
percent of incidents with evacuations ordered, the rate of injuries or fatalities per 100,000 population, and the rate of
incidents per 100,000 population. Data are available for 13 to 16 states from 1996 to 2009 and for 7 states starting in

2010.

Advanced options for this indicator:

e Health Impact- incidents resulting in at least one reported injury or death within 24 hours of the incident or death.
e Evacuation Ordered- incidents resulting in evacuation of near-by residents or workers.

e Incident Type- incidents that occurred in a fixed facility or in transportation. A fixed facility is a stationary site, such as
industrial sites, schools, or farms. Incidents can also occur during the transport of a toxic substance either by ground,
air, pipeline, or water.

e Area Type- type of area where an incident occurred, including undeveloped, agricultural, commercial, industrial, or
residential. Each incident can have more than one area type.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Acute ToxicSubstanceReleases.htm

114



Page 20: 5/11/24, 3:51 PM Acute Toxic Substance Releases | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

e Primary Contributing Factor- main factor contributing to the release of the toxic substance, including bad weather,
equipment failure, intentional or illegal acts, or operator error.

e Release Type- type of substance release including spills, air emissions, and other. Spills are incidents where the
substance was released in a liquid or solid form. Air emissions are incidents where the substance was released in a
volatilization or aerosolized form. Other includes incidents where the substance was released in a form other than an

air emission or spill including fire, explosion and radiation.

More detailed information is available from NTSIP’s public use datasets and the historical datasets from the Hazardous
Substance Emergency Events Surveillance (HSEES) program.

e 2010 - present
e 1993 - 2009

Data Highlight

Ne WALLEY VIEW DARE

Pro (Pel 1 578.3524

Add points of interest to any map.
Click on the gear icon to view options, like hospitals, public schools, nursing homes, day cares, and more.

Data in Action

These data can be used to

e track toxic substance release incidents reported by state health departments.
¢ monitor trends in acute toxic substance release incidents from various areas across the United States.

¢ examine patterns and trends in locations of reported toxic substance releases, types of industries and substances
involved, contributing factors, and the resulting injuries and public health actions (i.e. evacuations, decontamination).

Learn More

e National Toxic Substances Incidents Program (NTSIP)

e Toxic Substances Portal: Health Effects of Exposure

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Acute ToxicSubstanceReleases.htm

2/4



Page 21: 5/11/24, 3:51 PM Acute Toxic Substance Releases | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Explore Acute Toxic Substance Release Data

Data Explorer

a a

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/AcuteToxicSubstanceReleases.htm

3/4



Page 22: 5/11/24, 3:51 PM Acute Toxic Substance Releases | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Corton fevge © dal ere

renee fog BH

aR men Pein om ng Be Pte et pee ge er ey ed Ea

dere rye seg eee | Pa od ce ee ee ee. rd ed ed!

dade Popesieres ary Ble | Perce col acieiy pee chee eed eit andres. wo ert Serco bee ne aed a |
Pa Pie Bl Pe ee hel ee de ed ee ee es eee ee ee ee ee ee ed ee
Berek: Peeve ra | Pairk eb A eS a 9! Wd oh
ee ee Bo ee Be al

Paar ak: Peri a ea Re, ame od eee) ieee i (Dad ea ae

dave Payee ere eee | red cd ca ee ed nr LS ad
fata"

dai Peters ere ees Peel aches i ee ee oe ee ee rerio 9 ead or es ed em acl

cme
PAST ied: Persie nhs a ies oe Peek ee i et Pome to
Cakes
dare. Pa ee es Par ot on ae ee ee
Cnicey

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/AcuteToxicSubstanceReleases.htm



Page 23: 5/11/24, 2:13 PM Air Pollution | CDC

Air Pollution

Climate change is projected to harm human health by increasing ground-level ozone and/or particulate matter air pollution in
some locations. Ground-level ozone (a key component of smog) is associated with many health problems, such as diminished
lung function, increased hospital admissions and emergency room visits for asthma, and increases in premature deaths.

Factors that affect ozone formation include heat, concentrations of precursor chemicals, and methane emissions. Particulate
matter concentrations are affected by wildfire emissions and air stagnation episodes, among other factors. By increasing
these different factors, climate change is projected to lead to increased concentrations of ozone and particulate matter in
some regions. Increases in global temperatures could cause associated increases in premature deaths related to worsened
ozone and particle pollution.

Estimates that assume no change in regulatory controls or population characteristics have ranged from 1,000 to 4,300
additional premature deaths nationally per year by 2050 from combined ozone and particle health effects. Less certainty
exists about the responses of airborne particles to climate change than the response of ozone. Health-related costs of the
current effects of ozone air pollution exceeding national standards have been estimated at $6.5 billion (in 2008 U.S. dollars)
nationwide, based on a U.S. assessment of health impacts from ozone levels during 2000-2002.

Watch a short video about air quality changes, and learn what communities can do to prepare.

CDC Air Pollution Resources:

e Air Quality - information and resources on air pollutants, particle pollution, and other relevant topics
e Asthma - guidance on asthma symptoms, triggers, and management
e Air Quality and Asthma Data - Tracking Portal - interactive maps, tables, and charts

e Climate Change Decreases the Quality of the Air We Breathe [PDF - 110 KB]

Page last reviewed: December 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/air_pollution.htm



Page 24: 5/11/24, 3:51 PM Air Quality | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

CDC Centers for Disease —
Y Control and Prevention

Home

Air Quality

We Track That

Since the 1950s, air quality has been a major public health and environmental concern. Local, state, and national programs
have helped us learn more about the problems and how to solve them. Federal, state, local, and tribal air agencies operate
and maintain a wide variety of outdoor air monitoring systems [% across the United States. Many of these systems serve
several environmental objectives. At a basic level, they let us know how clean or polluted the air is, help us track progress in
reducing air pollution, and inform the public about air quality in their communities. The Tracking Network hosts and uses data
from some of these sources to help paint a more complete picture of air quality in the United States.

Types of Data

CDC works closely with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 4, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA), [4 the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association (NOAA), [4 and the National Weather Service [4 to provide air
quality data on the Tracking Network and to better understand how air pollution affects our health.

Monitor + Modeled Air Data

After careful study, EPA and CDC found that air pollution modeled predictions are very similar to actual monitor data in
areas where the two can be compared. In some areas, the modeled data underestimates or overestimates the air
pollutant concentration levels when compared to the Air Quality System (AQS) monitoring data. Therefore, the best way
to use modeled air data is in conjunction with actual monitoring data. On the Tracking Network, both AQS [4 and
modeled datasets are available to track possible exposures to ozone and PMs, evaluate health impacts, conduct
analytical studies linking health effects and the environment, and guide public health actions.

e Ozone Days Above Regulatory Standard
The number of days in which the daily maximum 8-hour average ozone concentration exceeds a standard provides an

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/AirQuality.htm

1/16



Page 25: 5/11/24, 3:51 PM Air Quality | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

indication of short-term spikes in ozone concentrations. This may give you an idea of how many days per year you
may be exposed to unhealthy levels of ozone.

e PM, - Days Above Regulatory Standard
These data help summarize short-term trends in particle pollution concentrations. This may give you an idea of how
many days per year you may be exposed to unhealthy levels of particulate matter.

e Annual PM,, - Level
These data help summarize long-term trends in particle pollution concentrations. This will give you an idea of what the

yearly level of PM 5 is in an area.

Health Impacts of Fine Particles in Air: Mortality Benefits Associated with Reducing PM,,, Concentration Levels
To calculate these data, CDC is using EPA’s BenMAP [4 with modeled air data for fine particulates, death data from CDC's
National Center for Health Statistics, population data from the U.S. Census Bureau [4, and information from scientific
literature about the relationship between change in air pollution and how that influences health effects. These data
summarize the estimated number of deaths prevented and percent change in deaths associated with lowering PM25
concentration levels. The Tracking Network lets the user sort many results by categories of county-level
sociodemographic variables such as percentage of population in poverty, percentage of adult smokers, population
density, and more.

Air Toxics
Data from EPA's National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment (NATA [4 ) are used to develop the air toxics indicators for the

Tracking Network. Air toxics measures can be used to

e prioritize emission sources as potential targets for risk reduction activities and further study,
e identify locations of interest for further investigation, and

e show the geographic distribution of air toxics.

Forecasted Air Quality

CDC's Environmental Public Health Tracking Program collaborated with the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration's (NASA) Goddard Space Flight Center to develop this data set. The forecasts included in this indicator can
help decision-makers and other stakeholders anticipate harmful air pollution exposures several days in advance. This
composition forecast data set is a research-grade product and should be used only in circumstances where substantial
error in the estimates does not pose a significant threat to human health or other operational priorities.

Wildland Fires
This indicator displays locations of predicted surface smoke concentrations from wildfires that are layered on top of

county- and census tract-level measures of access to care and social vulnerability, health status, annual air quality levels,
or population characteristics.

Data Highlight

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/AirQuality.htm



Page 26: Air Quality | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

5/11/24, 3:51 PM

PEP! Lac 1A) ve OS TEPHT eC

Will your area be affected by wildfire smoke? The Tracking Network has data that can show the predicted movement of

wildfire smoke based on wind patterns and other factors.
CDC'S ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC
VISUALIZING REAL TIME peers YY

WILDLAND FIRE SMOKE
{ http://ephtracking.cdc.gov/DataExplorer/ Q }

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention
National Center for
Environmental Health

Data in Action

The health effects of air pollution are influenced by social, demographic, and economic factors. The Tracking Network allows
users to analyze factors that may increase vulnerability to health effects including income, race and ethnicity, health insurance

status, and age. Tracking air quality in a standard way over time can help us

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/AirQuality.htm



Page 27: 5/11/24, 3:51 PM Air Quality | Tracking | NCEH | CDC
e track potential exposures and evaluate health impacts.
e estimate the positive health impacts that could be achieved with a change in outdoor air quality.
¢ prioritize emission sources as potential targets for risk reduction activities and for further study.
e identify locations of interest for further investigation.

e assist public health practitioners and emergency responders identify populations at risk for exposure to wildfire smoke
and make informed decisions before, during, and after wildfire smoke emergencies.
Read these success stories to learn about air quality related work happening in our funded Tracking Programs.

California | Colorado | Florida | Maine | Maryland | Massachusetts | New York | Washington

Learn More

Air Quality
Air Now [4 (EPA)

National Ambient Air Quality Standards [4 (EPA)
Wildfires
Wildfires, Climate, & Health

Tracking Resources

e Tracks FAQs: How Do | Link Asthma Rates and Air Quality Data?
e Tracks FAQs: What is Modeled Air Data?

Related Content Areas
e Asthma

e Children’s Environmental Health

e Health Impact Assessment

Data Explorer

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/AirQuality.htm

4/6



Page 28: 5/11/24, 3:51 PM Air Quality | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

x

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

Carter] fe 6 eee

Ce ee Bee! ie eee eo ee ed ee

dere Peer oe cee =| Per ol ee ee eee ee. ee ed ed

dade: Parsi ee Aci Pcs ol ciety. ee Cie eee ae i er ere be ee 0 ed

fale ee oe oe ey Gadel Peed ol el ee ey eed oe ee ee NN es do oa rt ] i 0

ja es ere ee | Pe ce ee ae eT: Wee: a Ss pre La! cd ela ie

dre Payers Srey es Pare cl acta. ges ee eee ae i ed =, me. edt oe
ee Pee es Pgs oe eee ee ie ew ee ee te]
AASB Peele ces U5 pe ee ee ee eS oy ee ee

daeg Oey pee eres ters ae a a eb eg ae ee ee ae

die Porters aoe ie | Perel aches wi aie ene wil oom eee coulis ctor oe oe ee mood aa C0 wre

et ee ee eg ee ee ri i a
Lika

ee eee ee Pod 2 ee ee ee) ee ee) ee eee

View data in simple charts

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/AirQuality.htm



Page 29: 5/11/24, 3:51 PM

API

Air Quality | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Last Reviewed: June 6, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/AirQuality.htm

6/6



Page 30: 5/11/24, 2:13 PM Allergens and Pollen | CDC

r DC Centers for Disease
te Control and Prevention

Allergens and Pollen

Climate change will potentially lead to both higher pollen concentrations and longer pollen seasons, causing more people to
suffer more health effects from pollen and other allergens.

Pollen is an airborne allergen that can affect our health. Pollen grains are tiny “seeds” dispersed from flowering plants, trees,
grass, and weeds. The amount and type of pollen in the air depends on the season and geographic region. Though pollen
counts are typically higher during the warmer seasons, some plants pollinate year-round.

Climate change will potentially lead to shifts in precipitation patterns, more frost-free days, warmer seasonal air
temperatures, and more carbon dioxide (CO) in the atmosphere. These changes can affect:

e when the pollen season starts and ends and how long it lasts each year,
e how much pollen plants create and how much is in the air,

e how pollen affects our health (the “allergenicity” of pollen),

e how much pollen we're exposed to, and

e our risk of experiencing allergy symptoms.

Pollen exposure can trigger various allergic reactions, including symptoms of hay fever. Hay fever, also known as allergic
rhinitis, occurs when allergens like pollen enter your body and your immune system mistakenly identifies them as a threat. If
you have allergic rhinitis, your body then responds to the allergen by releasing chemicals that can cause symptoms in the
nose. Symptoms of allergic rhinitis can occur during certain seasons or year-round, depending on the allergen, and affect as
many as 60 million people per year in the United States. Symptoms from allergic rhinitis include sneezing, runny nose, and
congestion.

Pollen exposure can also trigger symptoms of allergic conjunctivitis. Allergic conjunctivitis is the inflammation of the lining of
the eye (conjunctiva) due to exposure to allergens like those in pollen. Allergic conjunctivitis is found in up to 30% of the
general population and as many as 7 out of 10 of patients with allergic rhinitis. Symptoms from allergic conjunctivitis include
red, watery, or itchy eyes.

People with respiratory illnesses like asthma may be more sensitive to pollen. Exposure to pollen has been linked to asthma
attacks and increases in hospital admissions for respiratory illness. Medical costs linked with pollen exceed $3 billion every
year, with nearly half of those costs being linked to prescription medicine. Higher pollen concentrations and longer pollen
seasons can also make you more sensitive to allergens. This can trigger asthma episodes in individuals with asthma and
diminish productive work and school days.

Extreme rainfall and rising temperatures also can contribute to indoor air quality problems. For example, they can cause the

growth of mold indoors, which may lead to worsened respiratory conditions for people with asthma and/or mold allergies and
heightened challenges in maintaining adequate asthma control.

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/allergen.htm



Page 31: 5/11/24, 2:13 PM Allergens and Pollen | CDC

CDC Allergen Resources:

e Asthma - guidance on asthma symptoms, triggers, and management
e Asthma and Allergies in the Workplace - NIOSH resources on a variety of asthma- and allergy-related topics

e Asthma and Mold After a Hurricane - Information for Clinicians Helping Patients with Respiratory Conditions After a
Hurricane or Other Tropical Storm

e Covid-19 and Seasonal Allergies - Frequently asked questions about Covid-19 and seasonal allergies

e Pollen and Your Health
Page last reviewed: August 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/allergen.htm

2/2



Page 32: 5/11/24, 3:54 PM Asthma | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Centers for Disease —
Control and Prevention

Asthma

We Track That

The Tracking Network uses data from the U.S. Census Bureau [4, hospital and emergency department data provided by state
and local health departments, CDC's Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (BRFSS), and death certificates from CDC's
National Center for Health Statistics to calculate state and local data about asthma.

Asthma data on the Tracking Network provide insights about people diagnosed and living with asthma and about people who
experience asthma attacks.

Types of Data

The Tracking Network provides data on asthma hospital stays, emergency department visits for asthma, and asthma
prevalence, which is the number of people diagnosed with and living with asthma.

Asthma Prevalence among Adults and Children*

Prevalence estimates are organized by different variables to estimate the number of people with asthma in different time
periods and geographic areas, such as states and counties. These data are collected from the Behavior Risk Factor
Surveillance Survey (BRFSS), CDC's National Asthma Control Program's Asthma Call-back Survey (ACBS), and from CDC's
Population Level Analysis and Community Estimates (PLACES) Project. PLACES data on the Tracking Network are available
at the census tract level for all 50 states.

Emergency Department Visits for Asthma*

This indicator estimates the number and rate of emergency department visits for asthma. These data can be used to
identify trends and patterns of emergency department visits over time and in different geographic areas, such as states
and counties.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/asthma.htm

1/7



Page 33: 5/11/24, 3:54 PM Asthma | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Hospitalizations for Asthma* 4
This indicator can be used to identify trends and patterns in the occurrence of asthma hospitalizations across time and
space

* Asthma hospital admissions tend to be for more severe asthma attacks and do not include asthma among individuals who do not receive medical care, who are not hospitalized, or who are treated in outpatient
settings. Differences between geographic areas may be the result of differences in the underlying population or in the diagnostic or coding techniques used by the reporting hospital.

4 These data are supplied by health departments funded by the CDC Tracking Program.

Data Highlight

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/asthma.htm 2/7



Page 34: 5/11/24, 3:54 PM Asthma | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/asthma.htm 3/7



Page 35: 5/11/24, 3:54 PM Asthma | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

[ ae oan — a ; T
bas ae

Mg ec
Ca]

4
i
bi i.” &

a) ee a) ee eee 2 2 ee ee eee

F ro

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/asthma.htm



Page 36: 5/11/24, 3:54 PM Asthma | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

PA [JPG - 164 KB]

In 2016, non-Hispanic Black children had higher rates of reported asthma compared to non-Hispanic White children in
some states. Explore more asthma prevalence data among children.

Data in Action

You can use Tracking Network asthma data to:

e Develop interventions to reduce the health burden from this disease
e Identify which populations need targeted interventions
e Evaluate prevention and control efforts

e Discover trends and patterns over time and in different geographic areas

In addition, you can use the Tracking Network to review asthma data in relation to data on environmental conditions, health
problems, and population characteristics to create a more complete picture of a community's environmental public health.

Read these success stories to learn about asthma related work in our funded Tracking Programs.

California | Colorado | Connecticut | Florida | Maryland | Massachusetts | New York | New York City | Pennsylvania | Vermont |
Washington

Learn More

e Asthma
e Asthma FAQs

e National Asthma Control Program

Tracking Resources

e Track FAQs: How Do | Link Asthma Rates and Air Quality Data?

e Track FAQs: How Can | Tell if Asthma Hospitalization Rates in my Area are Changing Over Time?

Related Content Areas

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/asthma.htm

5/7



Page 37: 5/11/24, 3:54 PM Asthma | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

More emergency department visit, hospitalization, and death data: Carbon Monoxide Poisoning, COPD, Heart Attack, Heat
Stress Illness

Explore Asthma Data

Data Explorer

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/asthma.htm

6/7



Page 38: 5/11/24, 3:54 PM Asthma | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Corton fevge © dal ere

renee fog BH

aR men Pein om ng Be Pte et pee ge er ey ed Ea

dere rye seg eee | Pa od ce ee ee ee. rd ed ed!

dade Popesieres ary Ble | Perce col acieiy pee chee eed eit andres. wo ert Serco bee ne aed a |
Pa Pie Bl Pe ee hel ee de ed ee ee es eee ee ee ee ee ee ed ee
Berek: Peeve ra | Pairk eb A eS a 9! Wd oh
ee ee Bo ee Be al

Paar ak: Peri a ea Re, ame od eee) ieee i (Dad ea ae

dave Payee ere eee | red cd ca ee ed nr LS ad
fata"

dai Peters ere ees Peel aches i ee ee oe ee ee rerio 9 ead or es ed em acl

cme
PAST ied: Persie nhs a ies oe Peek ee i et Pome to
Cakes
dare. Pa ee es Par ot on ae ee ee
Cnicey

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/asthma.htm



Page 39: 5/11/24, 3:55 PM Biomonitoring: Population Exposures | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

CDC Centers for Disease —
Y Control and Prevention

Home

Biomonitoring: Population Exposures

We Track That

Biomonitoring data come from CDC's National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). NHANES evaluates a
nationally-representative sample of the U.S. population. It is designed for survey findings to reflect the nation as a whole,
rather than individual counties or states.

The NHANES survey design does not allow use of the data to estimate exposure by state, city, or for specific areas associated
with hazardous chemical exposures. For example, you cannot extract a subset of data and examine levels of blood lead that
represent a state population. In addition, these biomonitoring data do not provide

e data about specific sources of exposure, such as hazardous chemical sites or uses.

¢ data about specific pathways of exposure, like breathing, eating, drinking, or touching.
e information about specific products or environments.

e regulatory guidelines or recommendations.

e information about health effects related to chemical exposures.

Types of Data

Data about human exposure to environmental chemicals come from CDC's National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES)as presented in CDC's National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals. NHANES is an ongoing,
complex survey that samples the U.S population. It collects different types of information to provide an assessment of the
population's overall health and nutrition.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Biomonitoring.htm



Page 40: 5/11/24, 3:55 PM Biomonitoring: Population Exposures | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

The biomonitoring indicator below provides information about environmental chemicals or their metabolites (see box to the
right) found in human urine or blood.

National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals
This indicator shows concentrations of different environmental chemicals in urine or blood. These data tell you what
levels of those environmental chemicals are found in urine and blood samples from people who are typical examples of

the U.S. population. These data are available for the United States as a whole, not by county, state, or region. They do not
provide information about specific sources of exposure, exposure pathways, or health effects from exposure.

Topic Areas

Tobacco Smoke
e Cotinine
Metals

e Arsenic
¢ Cadmium
e Lead

e Mercury

e Uranium
Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs)

e Benzene

e Toluene

Disinfection By-Products

e Chloroform

Per- and Polyfluorinated Substances (PFAS)

e Per- and Polyfluorinated Substances (PFAS)
Personal Care and Consumer Products

e Bisphenol A (BPA
e Triclosan
e Parabens
e 2,5dichlorophenol
e 2,4dichlorophenol

Pesticides

¢ Organophosphorus
e Pyrethroid

Polychoclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs)
e Polychoclic Aromatic

e Hydrocarbons (PAHs)

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Biomonitoring.htm

2/5



Page 41: 5/11/24, 3:55 PM Biomonitoring: Population Exposures | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Phthalates

e Phthalates

Data Highlight

11 WALLER VEN DARE
AGHA Diy, OR ea

Praca (Pelt i GDS

Add points of interest to any map.
Click on the gear icon to view options, like hospitals, public schools, nursing homes, day cares, and more.

Data in Action

Biomonitoring data can be used to find environmental chemical exposures and to measure how common these exposures are
in groups of people, such as the U.S. population. These data are often the best source of information for scientists, doctors,
and health officials to help prevent or reduce exposure to some environmental chemicals. For example, public health workers
could use biomonitoring data to find out what chemicals people are exposed to and the levels of the chemicals that are
found. If efforts are needed to prevent or reduce exposure, biomonitoring data can show if those efforts work. Also, these
data could be used to determine whether exposure levels are different among potentially vulnerable groups such as
minorities and children.

Learn More

e National Biomonitoring Program

e National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)

e National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals
e ATSDR Toxic Substances Portal

Tracking Resources

¢ How-to Guide for Visualizing Data from the National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals [8
[PDF - 1 MB]

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Biomonitoring.htm 3/5



Page 42: 5/11/24, 3:55 PM Biomonitoring: Population Exposures | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

¢ Guidance, Examples & Tools for Probability Sampling When Designing a Population-Based Biomonitoring Study BB
[PDF - 581 KB]

Related Content Areas
e Pesticide Exposures

e Populations and Vulnerabilities

Explore Biomonitoring: Population Exposures Data

Data Explorer

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Biomonitoring.htm

45



Page 43: 5/11/24, 3:55 PM Biomonitoring: Population Exposures | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Corton fevge © dal ere

renee fog BH

aR men Pein om ng Be Pte et pee ge er ey ed Ea

dere rye seg eee | Pa od ce ee ee ee. rd ed ed!

dade Popesieres ary Ble | Perce col acieiy pee chee eed eit andres. wo ert Serco bee ne aed a |
Pa Pie Bl Pe ee hel ee de ed ee ee es eee ee ee ee ee ee ed ee
Berek: Peeve ra | Pairk eb A eS a 9! Wd oh
ee ee Bo ee Be al

Paar ak: Peri a ea Re, ame od eee) ieee i (Dad ea ae

dave Payee ere eee | red cd ca ee ed nr LS ad
fata"

dai Peters ere ees Peel aches i ee ee oe ee ee rerio 9 ead or es ed em acl

cme
PAST ied: Persie nhs a ies oe Peek ee i et Pome to
Cakes
dare. Pa ee es Par ot on ae ee ee
Cnicey

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Last Reviewed: June 3, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Biomonitoring.htm



Page 44: 5/11/24, 3:57 PM Birth Defects | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Birth Defects

We Track That

The Tracking Network conducts monitoring of twelve birth defects. These defects are monitored as they are potentially linked
with suspected environmental risk factors, and because these defects are included in most birth defects monitoring
programs. The birth defect data found on the Tracking Network are supplied by health departments funded by the CDC
Tracking Program.

Types of Data

The Tracking Network has data for twelve birth defect indicators. For each birth defect indicator, there are two different
measures:

e Average annual number of cases among live births over a 5-year period.

e Prevalence per 10,000 live births over a 5-year period.
On the Tracking Network, birth defects are reported as prevalence. Prevalence measures the number of birth defects
occurring in a population and is the best way to report information about birth defects. This measure can be used to track the
number of birth defects within a state. Under advanced options, data on birth defects can be further refined by infant gender,

maternal age group, and maternal race/ethnicity.

Birth defect data are available at the county level. However, the Tracking Network does not have data for all states. And for
some states, only certain counties have data. In addition, some states have more years of data available than others.

The Tracking Network has data on the following birth defects:

e Anencephaly
e Cleft Lip with Cleft Palate

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/BirthDefects.htm 1/5



Page 45: 5/11/24, 3:57 PM Birth Defects | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

e Cleft Lip without Cleft Palate

e Cleft Palate without Cleft Lip

° Gastroschisis

e Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome

e Hypospadias

e Limb Deficiencies

e Spina Bifida without Anencephaly

e Tetralogy of Fallot

e Transposition of the Great Arteries (Vessels)

e Trisomy 21 (Down Syndrome)

Learn more about these Birth Defects.

Data Highlight

A! * . | et ill |i

en Ps FS ae | PL PS | ee oe ee) Oe Fy

Add layers to any map.
Click on the gear icon to select layers: surface smoke, current radar, transportation noise, active Atlantic cyclones. Try it!

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/BirthDefects.htm

2/5



Page 46: 5/11/24, 3:57 PM Birth Defects | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Data in Action

Tracking data can be used to make comparisons within a state; birth defect data from different states should not be
compared. Tracking birth defects in a standard way over time can help us:

e Evaluate changes in the distribution of birth defects by place and time
e Evaluate the prevalence of birth defects by maternal age, maternal race/ethnicity, or infant sex
e Target interventions and activities aimed at preventing birth defects in specific populations and communities

e Help allocate resources and services for affected babies and families

Read these success stories to learn about the birth defects related work happening in our funded Tracking Programs.

California | Florida

Learn More

e Birth Defects

Related Content Areas
e Reproductive and Birth Outcomes

e Developmental Disabilities

Explore Birth Defects Data

Data Explorer

a a

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/BirthDefects.htm

3/5



Page 47: 5/11/24, 3:57 PM

Quick Reports

Gorter fee 6 dal eee
ree

Lia

Cniay

Birth Defects | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

img Fa

Pep rm eo ag pes Rape pe es aed a oe

Pater od ee ee ee ee eee. od ad oe!

Perc cl ciety. ee eer ee es cor eee be ee el ee
EPpy a os Reape age maar Pay ae, prey prema A erg cam me ee Femeee aese Teeee
es ee ea End
fe ye Be ee Se io

ee ee og ee EY

Prard cf ca a ee i ee)
ara”

Pes oe aches. i ee ee oe ee oui oko a cel er. en ed eam arc
me

Daewoo i sin ea Lule ei yr lL Sr dt |

Par ot ne ee ee ee ee eee

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/BirthDefects.htm

4/5



Page 48: 5/11/24, 3:57 PM Birth Defects | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/BirthDefects.htm 5/5



Page 49: 5/11/24, 2:08 PM Blood Lead Levels in Children | Lead | CDC
Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Home

Blood Lead Levels in Children

CDC recommends testing blood for lead exposure. There are often no apparent symptoms when a child is exposed to
lead. Because of this, a blood test is the best way to determine if a child has been exposed to lead. If your child may have

been exposed to lead, talk to your healthcare provider about getting a blood lead test. Based on your child's blood lead
test results, healthcare providers can recommend follow-up actions and care.

Testing Blood Lead Levels

During a blood lead test, a small amount of blood is taken from the finger, heel, or arm and tested for lead. Two types of
blood tests may be used.

e A finger-prick or heel-prick (capillary) test is usually the first step to determine if a child has lead in their blood.
While finger-prick tests can provide fast results, they also can produce higher results if lead on the skin is captured in
the sample. For this reason, a finger-prick test that shows a blood lead level at or above the CDC's blood lead
reference value is usually followed by a second test to confirm.

e Avenous blood draw takes blood from the child’s vein. This type of test can take a few days to receive results and is
often used to confirm blood lead levels seen in the first capillary test.

Both capillary and venous samples can be analyzed using higher complexity methods such as such as inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) or graphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscopy (GFAAS). However, venous

samples are more reliable at identifying lower blood lead levels than capillary samples when analyzed using higher
complexity methods (i.e., ICP-MS and GFAAS).

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/blood-lead-levels.htm 1/3,



Page 50: 5/11/24, 2:08 PM Blood Lead Levels in Children | Lead | CDC

What You Need to Know to Protect Children from Lead Exposure

Most children with any lead in their blood have no obvious immediate symptoms. If a child may have been exposed to
lead, parents should talk to their child’s health care provider about getting a blood lead test. Healthcare providers and
most local health departments can test for lead in the blood. Many private insurance policies cover the cost of testing for
lead in the blood. The cost of blood lead testing for children enrolled in Medicaid is covered by the Centers for Medicare
& Medicaid services.

Treating Children Based on Their Blood Lead Levels

If a child has lead in their blood above the CDC blood lead reference value, their doctor may recommend follow-up
services. These include finding and removing lead from the child's environment, feeding the child a diet high in iron and
calcium, connecting the child to early educational services, and scheduling follow-up blood testing. Early identification of
lead in the blood is key to reducing the long-term effects of lead exposure.

If a child has very high levels of lead in their blood, health care providers may recommend other types of testing and
treatment to remove some of the lead from the blood. This may include getting an x-ray to determine if they have high
levels of lead in their blood. If a child does have high levels of lead in their blood, they may receive chelation therapy,
which is a medical treatment used to remove lead from the body.

For more information on caring for children with lead in their blood, refer to CDC’s Recommended Actions Based on
Blood Lead Level.

Blood Lead Reference Value

The amount of lead in blood is referred to as the blood lead level, which is measured in micrograms of lead per deciliter
of blood (ug/dL). CDC currently uses a blood lead reference value (BLRV) of 3.5 micrograms per deciliter to identify
children with blood lead levels that are higher than most children’s levels. This level is based on the on the 97.5th
percentile of the blood lead values among U.S. of children ages 1-5 years from the 2015-2016 and 2017-2018 National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) cycles. Children with blood lead levels at or above the BLRV are
among the top 2.5% of U.S. children with the highest blood lead levels.

Preventing Childhood Lead Exposure

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/blood-lead-levels.htm



Page 51: 5/11/24, 2:08 PM Blood Lead Levels in Children | Lead | CDC

Though lead can be found in many places in a child’s environment, lead exposure is preventable. The key is stopping
children from coming into contact with lead. Parents can take simple steps to make their homes more lead-safe. For more
information, refer to Lead Poisoning Prevention.

Additional Resources

e Testing Children for Lead Poisoning - information about testing children for lead poisoning.

¢ CDC's Recommended Terminology When Discussing Children’s Blood Lead Levels [8 [PDF - 330 KB] - guidance for
interpreting and discussing children’s blood lead levels.

e Blood Lead Levels in Children §§ [PDF - 100 KB] - fact sheet with information on blood lead levels in children.

e 5 Things You Can Do to Help Lower Your Child’s Lead Level BB [PDF - 234 KB] - fact sheet with information on how to
help lower elevated blood lead levels, in English BR [PDF - 234 KB] and en Espafiol. 23 [PDF - 166 KB]

e Recommended Actions Based on Blood Lead Level - summary of recommendations for follow-up and case
management of children based on confirmed blood lead levels.

e Standard Surveillance Definitions and Classifications - meaning of words you often hear or read about lead.

¢ Blood Lead Reference Value - CDC recommendations on children’s blood lead levels.

Last Reviewed: December 2, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/blood-lead-levels.htm

3/3



Page 52: 5/11/24, 2:10 PM Blood Lead Reference Value | Lead | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention

Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Home

Blood Lead Reference Value

CDC uses a blood lead reference value (BLRV) of 3.5 micrograms per deciliter (ug/dL) to identify children with blood lead
levels that are higher than most children’s levels.

CDC’s Blood Lead Reference Value

In 2012, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) introduced a blood lead “reference value” to identify children
with higher levels of lead in their blood compared to most children. This level is based on the 97.5th percentile of the blood
lead values among U.S. children ages 1-5 years from 2015-2016 and 2017-2018 National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES) cycles. Children with blood lead levels at or above the BLRV represent those at the top 2.5% with the highest
blood lead levels.

NHANES is a population-based survey to assess the health and nutritional status of adults and children in the U.S. and
determine the prevalence of major diseases and risk factors for diseases. Every four years, CDC reanalyzes blood lead data
from the most recent two NHANES cycles to determine whether the reference value should be updated.

The value of 3.5 g/dL was derived from NHANES data from the 2015-2016 and 2017-2018 cycles. The Federal Advisory
Committee, called the Lead Exposure and Prevention Advisory Committee (LEPAC), unanimously voted on May 14, 2021 in
favor of recommending that CDC update the reference value to 3.5 g/dL based on these NHANES data.

CDC's BLRV is a screening tool to identify children who have higher levels of lead in their blood compared with most children.
The reference value is not health-based and is not a regulatory standard. States independently determine action thresholds
based on state laws, regulations, and resource availability. CDC encourages healthcare providers and public health
professionals to follow the recommended follow-up actions based on confirmed blood lead levels.

Previous Terminology

Until 2012, children were identified as having a blood lead “level of concern” if the test result was 10 or more micrograms per
deciliter (ug/dL) of lead in blood. CDC is no longer using this term and is instead using the blood lead reference value to
identify children who have more lead in their blood than most children.

In 2012, the blood lead reference value (BLRV) for children corresponding to the 97.5 percentile was established to be 5
micrograms per deciliter (ug/dL) based NHANES data from 2007-2010. Prior to this current update, blood lead levels below 5
yg/dL may, or may not, have been reported to parents. The new lower blood lead reference value of 3.5 yg/dL means that
more children could be identified as having lead exposure allowing parents, doctors, public health officials, and communities
to act earlier to reduce the child’s future exposure to lead.

Additional Resources

e Blood Lead Levels in Children - information on blood lead testing in children

e Recommended Actions Based on Blood Lead Level - recommendations for follow-up and case management of children
based on confirmed blood lead levels

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/data/blood-lead-reference-value.htm



Page 53: 5/11/24, 2:10 PM Blood Lead Reference Value | Lead | CDC
e CDC's Recommended Terminology When Discussing Children’s Blood Lead Levels 9 [PDF - 330 KB] - guidance for
interpreting and discussing children’s blood lead levels

e¢ CDC Response to Advisory Committee on Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention (ACCLPP) Recommendations in “Low
Level Lead Exposure Harms Children: A Renewed Call of Primary Prevention” BR [PDF - 165 KB]

e Recommendations of the Advisory Committee for Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention (ACCLPP) “Low Level Lead

Exposure Harms Children: A Renewed Call of Primary Prevention” BB [PDF - 922 KB]
Last Reviewed: December 2, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/data/blood-lead-reference-value.htm

2/2



Page 54: 5/11/24, 3:59 PM Cancer | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

r DC Centers for Disease
betes Control and Prevention

Cancer

We Track That

Through surveillance and tracking, scientists have observed a relationship between some cancers and the presence of certain
environmental pollutants. The Tracking Network has data for eighteen types of cancer that are potentially linked with
suspected environmental risk factors. The cancer data found on the Tracking Network are supplied by CDC's National
Program of Cancer Registries and NCI's Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results Program 4.

Types of Data

The Tracking Network provides data on twenty cancer indicators. For each cancer indicator, you can view state-level data by:

e Annual age-adjusted incidence rate per 100,000 population

e Annual number of cases.

Incidence is the number of new cases of illness occurring within a specific population over a period of time. For some
cancers, the data can also be aggregated over five years. Data are available for most states, depending on the type of
cancer and the year. Some cancer types have data at the county level. Under advanced options, cancer data can be
further refined by sex and race/ethnicity.

The Tracking Network has data on the following types of cancer:

e Acute Myeloid Leukemia

e Bladder Cancer

e Brain and Other Nervous System Cancer
e Breast Cancer (Females only)

e Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Cancer.htm

115



Page 55: 5/11/24, 3:59 PM Cancer | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

e Colorectal Cancer

e Esophageal Cancer

e Kidney Cancer

e Larynx Cancer

e Leukemia

e Liver Cancer

e Lung and Bronchus Cancers
e Melanoma

e¢ Mesothelioma

e Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma
© Oral Cancer

e Pancreatic Cancer

e Prostate Cancer (Males only)
e Testicular Cancer (Males only)

e Thyroid Cancer

Learn more about cancer.

Data Highlight

A) i ws (Lh

PSR ES | PL ee | eee oe Ae) ae A Pe (ea

LEGEND

Add layers to any map.
Click on the gear icon to select layers: surface smoke, current radar, transportation noise, active Atlantic cyclones.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Cancer.htm



Page 56: 5/11/24, 3:59 PM Cancer | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Data in Action

The Tracking Network is making cancer incidence data easier to use by integrating the information with other health outcome
data and environmental data. Tracking can add to existing public health surveillance of cancer by examining potential
ecological relationships with environmental exposures.

Although environmental pollution has been a source of great public concern for decades, more research is needed about
environmental exposures at the community level. Evidence is building to support a link between cancer and lower levels of
exposures to environmental pollutants. Tracking cancer in a standard way over time can help us:

e Understand the distribution of cancer by place and time

e Understand the cancer burden for a specific geographical area, and by population subgroup

e Further develop linkage studies to evaluate environmental impacts on cancer

e Target interventions and activities aimed at cancer prevention in specific populations and communities

e Help allocate resources and services for affected populations
Read these success stories to learn about cancer related work happening in our funded Tracking Programs.

California [4 | Connecticut | lowa | Kansas | Maryland | Massachusetts | Minnesota | New Hampshire | New Mexico | New
York | Oregon | Utah | Wisconsin

Learn More

e Cancer

Tracking Resources

¢ Cancer Infographic PB
Related Content Areas
e Radon

e Sunlight & UV

e Pesticide Exposures

e Toxic Substances Releases

e Lifestyle Risk Factors

Data Explorer

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Cancer.htm

3/5



Page 57: 5/11/24, 3:59 PM Cancer | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

x

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

Carter] fe 6 eee

Ce ee Bee! ie eee eo ee ed ee

dere Peer oe cee =| Per ol ee ee eee ee. ee ed ed

dade: Parsi ee Aci Pcs ol ciety. ee Cie eee ae i er ere be ee 0 ed

fale ee oe oe ey Gadel Peed ol el ee ey eed oe ee ee NN es do oa rt ] i 0

ja es ere ee | Pe ce ee ae eT: Wee: a Ss pre La! cd ela ie

dre Payers Srey es Pare cl acta. ges ee eee ae i ed =, me. edt oe
ee Pee es Pgs oe eee ee ie ew ee ee te]
AASB Peele ces U5 pe ee ee ee eS oy ee ee

daeg Oey pee eres ters ae a a eb eg ae ee ee ae

die Porters aoe ie | Perel aches wi aie ene wil oom eee coulis ctor oe oe ee mood aa C0 wre

et ee ee eg ee ee ri i a
Lika

ee eee ee Pod 2 ee ee ee) ee ee) ee eee

View data in simple charts

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Cancer.htm



Page 58: 5/11/24, 3:59 PM

API

Cancer | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: March 3, 2021

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Cancer.htm

5/5



Page 59: 5/11/24, 4:00 PM Carbon Monoxide | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

TDC Centers for Disease —
4 21,4 Control and Prevention

Home

Carbon Monoxide

We Track That

The Tracking Network uses data from the U.S. Census Bureau [4, hospital and emergency department databases, and death
certificate data to get state and local data about CO poisonings. State-to-state comparisons about CO poisonings must be
made carefully because data collection and reporting methods vary by state.

Types of Data

The Tracking Network provides data about health effects due to CO poisoning. These data can be used to assess the burden
of severe CO poisoning, monitor trends over time, identify high-risk groups, and enhance prevention, education, and
evaluation efforts.

Unintentional CO Poisoning Emergency Department Visits *

This indicator shows the number of patients seen in an emergency department for CO poisoning. These patients may
have health effects ranging from very minor to very serious. However, even mild and moderate cases of CO poisoning
show a CO poisoning risk in the person's home, work, or play environment. Advanced options include distinctions
between fire, non-fire, unknown intent or mechanism poisonings. Data are available at the state level for select states.

Unintentional CO Poisoning Hospitalizations* 4

This indicator estimates the number of people who were admitted to the hospital due to CO exposure. Advanced options
include distinctions between fire, non-fire, unknown intent or mechanism poisonings. Data are available at the state level
for select states.

Unintentional CO Poisoning Mortality*

This indicator tracks the number of people who died because they were exposed to CO unintentionally. Advanced
options include distinctions between unintentional fire, non-fire, unknown intent or mechanism poisonings. Data are
available at the state level for the entire United States.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/CarbonMonoxide.htm

114



Page 60: 5/11/24, 4:00 PM Carbon Monoxide | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

* These data come from hospital records but recording a cause of injury in hospital admission or discharge records is not required in all states. This limits the ability to compare data

across states. In addition, death investigation laws and reporting vary by place. This limits the ability to compare mortality data across locations.

4 These data are supplied by health departments funded by the CDC Tracking Program.

Data Highlight

Add layers to any map.
Click on the gear icon to select layers: surface smoke, current radar, transportation noise, active Atlantic cyclones. Try it!

Data in Action

Tracking CO poisoning in a standard way over time can help us

better understand the health consequences of CO poisoning across the United States,
learn about the effects of long-term exposures to low levels of CO,

monitor trends,

identify high risk groups, and

determine the impact of public health policy aimed at preventing CO poisoning.

Read these success stories to learn about the CO poisoning related work happening in our funded Tracking Programs.

Kansas | Louisiana | Maine | Minnesota | New York State | New York City | Washington | Wisconsin

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/CarbonMonoxide.htm 2/4



Page 61: 5/11/24, 4:00 PM Carbon Monoxide | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Learn More

¢ Carbon Monoxide Poisoning Frequently Asked Questions

Tracking Resources

e Real-time Monitoring of Carbon Monoxide Poisonings in Wisconsin (Tracking in Action video)

e Faces of Tracking, Darren’s story

Related Content Areas
e¢ More emergency department visit, hospitalization, and death data: Asthma, COPD, Heart Attack, Heat Stress Illness

Explore Carbon Monoxide Data

Data Explorer

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/CarbonMonoxide.htm

3/4



Page 62: 5/11/24, 4:00 PM

Gorter fee 6 dal eee
ree
cd eile ee cs Bb

Cas

Cnicey

Carbon Monoxide | Tracking | NCEH | CDC.

mam TH

Pep mee an pees ape ead eee a a

Rater of ec ee ee ee eee. eed oe!

Pace col acheter ier edo. ic eee Sere be ne Bae) ee |
Per ee el ee ee ed eS a ees eee eee ee ee eT ad
Peco cd Mech ea eSB AH ee a ed Tn +

fe OE We Bo ee Be Dl

emcee RL eM cm a Ey A Rd rl AD ad wt +

Prard cf ca a ee i ee)
aT”

Pec aches. i ei ee oe ee oie Ook cel or. en eed ev 1! arc
oe

Wier hcl i in hPa ded el sa LT ri

Par ot on ae ee ee

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Last Reviewed: November 28, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/CarbonMonoxide.htm

44



Page 63: 5/11/24, 1:59 PM CDC - Chemical Weapons Elimination - Closing U.S. Chemical Warfare Agent Disposal Facilities

Espafiol | Other Languages

CDC Centers for Disease —
2° Control and Prevention

Chemical Weapons Elimination Home

Closing U.S. Chemical Warfare Agent Disposal Facilities

In July 2023, the last of the approximately 30,500 tons of stockpiled chemical warfare agent was destroyed. The complete
destruction of the stockpile fulfilled the U.S. treaty obligation under the Chemical Weapons Convention. [4

Chemical agent destruction facilities at each site destroyed the stockpile by incineration or neutralization.
Two organizations managed these activities:
¢ Chemical Materials Agency, renamed Chemical Materials Activity (CMA) (army.mil) [4 in 2012

e Program Manager for Assembled Chemical Weapons Alternatives (PEO-ACWA) (army.mil) 4

Status of Chemical Agent Disposal Facilities

Two sites are currently in the closure process:

e Blue Grass Chemical Agent-Destruction Pilot Plant, Richmond, Kentucky (cdc.gov)

e Pueblo Chemical Agent-Destruction Pilot Plant, Pueblo, Colorado (cdc.gov)
Seven sites have been closed:

e Aberdeen Chemical Agent Disposal Facility, Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland
e Anniston Chemical Agent Disposal Facility, Anniston, Alabama

e Johnston Atoll Chemical Agent Destruction System, Johnston Atoll

e¢ Newport Chemical Agent Disposal Facility, Newport, Indiana

e Pine Bluff Chemical Agent Disposal Facility, Pine Bluff, Arkansas

e Tooele Chemical Agent Disposal Facility, Tooele, Utah

e Umatilla Chemical Agent Disposal Facility, Umatilla, Oregon

Find more information about sites currently going through closure at Program Executive Office, Assembled Chemical
Weapons Alternatives (PEO ACWA) (army.mil). 4

The Closure Process

Before the closure process begins at a site, the U. S. Department of Defense (DoD) and site managers carefully plan, develop
standard operating procedures, and conduct safety reviews. CDC then reviews these plans and procedures for public health
and safety considerations.

The closure process involves dismantling, decontaminating, and demolishing the chemical agent disposal equipment and

buildings. It also requires considering how the property might be used in the future and verify it meets standards described in
the disposal facility's environmental permit.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/closing_facilities.htm



Page 64: 5/11/24, 1:59 PM CDC - Chemical Weapons Elimination - Closing U.S. Chemical Warfare Agent Disposal Facilities

During planning of the closure process, reviews of the facility's history and interviews with facility personnel help identify
contaminated and potentially contaminated equipment and buildings. Decontamination methods are designed specifically for
each facility's type of equipment and buildings, and their level of contamination.

Depending on past levels of contamination in a facility, its equipment could be decontaminated, removed, and reused. The
equipment could also be removed and disposed of as hazardous waste or left in place and demolished along with the facility's
structures. Equipment is dismantled as needed so interior surfaces can be checked for contamination. Air monitoring and
chemical analyses continue during the process to verify that all materials are successfully decontaminated.

After the buildings and remaining equipment are decontaminated, the entire facility is demolished.

Air monitoring and chemical analyses also continue after demolition to verify that all materials are successfully
decontaminated. After demolition, soil at the building sites is analyzed and cleaned up should it be necessary. This ensures
that the property meets the standards specified in the facility's environmental permit.

Closure Waste

Closure of chemical agent disposal facilities generates waste that includes the following:

e Used decontamination solutions,
e Protective clothing for workers,
e Cleaning tools and supplies,

e Equipment that cannot be reused or left at the facility.

In general, closure waste is handled in the same way as waste created during facility operations. Depending on its level of
contamination, waste may be thermally treated at the facility, sent to a permitted hazardous waste treatment and disposal
facility, or sent to a solid waste disposal facility.

Land Use after Closure of Chemical Agent Disposal Facilities

After a facility closes, its land might be used by DoD or another federal agency. DoD considers local economic conditions and
public comments when determining how to use the land.

For example, land at the first facility to close, Johnston Atoll Chemical Agent Destruction System, was given to the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service and became the Johnston Island National Wildlife Refuge [4 . After the Aberdeen Chemical Agent Disposal
Facility closed, DoD kept its office building there for use by other DoD agencies. Plans for the Newport Chemical Agent
Disposal Facility’s land include a variety of commercial uses.

Public Participation

DoD holds public meetings to tell the public about closure plans. These meetings are held in communities where the chemical
disposal facilities are located.

Learn more:

e Public Involvement at BGCAPP - Program Executive Office Assembled Chemical Weapons Alternative (army.mil) [4 (Blue
Grass facility)

e Public Involvement at PCAPP - Program Executive Office Assembled Chemical Weapons Alternative (army.mil) 4

(Pueblo facility)
Last Reviewed: October 6, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/closing_facilities.htm



Page 65: 5/11/24, 2:03 PM CDC - Chemical Weapons Elimination - History of U.S. Chemical Weapons Elimination

Espafiol | Other Languages

Chemical Weapons Elimination Home

Overview of U.S. Chemical Demilitarization

History of U.S. Chemical Weapons

From World War | to 1968, the United States produced and stockpiled chemical weapons to deter other countries from using
similar weapons. The amount stored had reached nearly 40,000 tons stockpiled in bulk or as assembled weapons at nine sites
in the United States. These weapons were never used in battle and eventually became obsolete and deteriorated with age.

From 1967 to 1970, a disposal operation called Cut Holes and Sink ‘Em (CHASE) loaded thousands of tons of chemical
weapons and agents onto old ships and intentionally sunk them at sea. In 1972, Congress passed the Marine Protection,
Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972, Public Law (PL) 92-532 (33 USC 1401), to prohibit this kind of dumping.

In 1970, Congress passed PL 91-121/441 (50 USC 1512). This law directed what is now the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) and the Office of the Surgeon General (OSG) to review Department of Defense (DoD) plans to transport, test, or
dispose of lethal chemical warfare agents. It also directed HHS and OSG to recommend actions to protect the public's health
and safety during such activities.

HHS and OSG assigned the National Center for Environmental Health (NCEH) at the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) to review the DoD plans. NCEH’s Chemical Demilitarization Program reviews plans and performs on-site
assessments of DoD’s chemical weapons demilitarization program. NCEH then recommends actions to ensure protection of
public health and safety when chemical warfare agents are destroyed.

By 1986, stockpiles totaled approximately 30,500 tons and because of the continued deterioration with age, Congress
required that all stockpiles of U.S. chemical warfare agents be destroyed by passing PL 99-145 (50 USC 1521).

In 1997, the United States ratified the United Nations International Chemical Weapons Convention treaty, agreeing to destroy

its stockpile of aging chemical weapons by April 29, 2007. However, the deadline was extended, and destruction was
completed in 2023.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/history.htm



Page 66: 5/11/24, 2:03 PM CDC - Chemical Weapons Elimination - History of U.S. Chemical Weapons Elimination

Locations and Status of Stockpile Sites

Umatilla, OR

Anniston, AL
Pine Bluff, AR

Johnston Atoll

Closed

The U.S. stockpile of chemical warfare agents primarily consisted of six chemicals:

Nerve Agents

¢ GA-Tabun or ethyl N,N-dimethyl phosphoroamidocyanidate, CAS 77-81-6
¢ GB - Sarin or isopropyl methylphosphonofluoridate, CAS 107-44-8
e VX - O-ethyl-S-(2-diisopropylaminoethyl)-methyl phosphonothiolate, CAS 50782-69-9

Vesicant, or Blister Agents

e H, HD - Sulfur mustard, bis-(2-chloroethyl)sulfide, or di-2-chloroethyl sulfide (HD), CAS 505-60-2
e L-Lewisite or dichloro 2-chlorovinylarsine, CAS 541-25-3

Disposal of Stockpiled Chemical Weapons

All stockpiled chemical warfare agents have been destroyed at all nine sites. Seven sites have been closed and the last two
sites should complete decontamination and demolition in 2026.

e Bluegrass, KY Chemical Agent Pilot Plant (cdc.gov)
e Pueblo, CO Chemical Agent Pilot Plant (cdc.gov)

Read more about Closing U.S. Chemical Warfare Agent Disposal Facilities.

Disposal of Recovered Chemical Weapons and Other Chemical Agent
Materials

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/history.htm 2/3



Page 67: 5/11/24, 2:03 PM CDC - Chemical Weapons Elimination - History of U.S. Chemical Weapons Elimination

Recovered Mortar

There are several types of recovered chemical weapons and other chemical agent materials. These chemical materials
include:

e Recovered chemical weapons,

¢ Chemical Agent Identification Sets (CAIS),

e Sea disposed chemical weapons,

e Former chemical weapons production facilities,
e¢ Chemical samples,

¢ Binary chemical weapons, [4

e Miscellaneous equipment, such as empty aerial spray tanks.

The U.S. Army decontaminated and demolished the former chemical weapons production facilities and binary chemical
weapons.

The U.S. Army Chemical Materials Activity, Recovered Chemical Materiel Directorate manages chemical material when it is
found. Any items suspected to be recovered chemical material are examined by a series of nondestructive tests. If they
contain chemical warfare agents, they are destroyed near the area where they are found, with specially designed mobile
equipment. Before destruction of the chemical material begins, CDC reviews destruction plans and methods to verify public
health is protected.

Read more about recovered chemical materials.

Related Programs
e Program Executive Office, Assembled Chemical Weapons Alternatives (PEO ACWA) (army.mil 4 ) 4
e Recovered Chemical Materiel Directorate (army.mil) 4
¢ Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness (FEMA.gov) [4
e Department of Public Health & Environment Pueblo Chemical Depot/PCAPP (colorado.gov) [4

¢ Kentucky Department of Environmental Protection/Blue Grass Army Depot (ky.gov) 4
¢ Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (opcw.org) 4
¢ Defense Threat Reduction Agency (dtra.mil) 4

e Chemical Emergencies (cdc.gov)

Historical Resources
e Methods to dispose of U.S. stockpiled chemical weapons (cdc.gov)
e Incineration (cdc.gov)
e Engineering controls at former U.S. stockpiled chemical weapons facilities (cdc.gov)

e Perspectives on Inhalation Exposure from Incinerator Air Emissions (cdc.gov)
Last Reviewed: October 16, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/history.htm



Page 68: 5/11/24, 3:01 PM CDC - Health Studies - Disaster Epidemiology - Frequently Asked Questions

Disaster Epidemiology & Response LB] ity

Disaster Epidemiology & Response

Disaster Epidemiology: Frequently Asked Questions
(FAQs)

Disaster Epidemiology

WHY SHOULD WE COLLECT DATA DURING A DISASTER?

Collecting health and needs information during a disaster helps to provide situational awareness. We need to know what is
happening to understand what the needs are, plan the response, and gather the appropriate resources. We want to prevent
further morbidity and mortality by addressing both immediate and long-term needs, adjusting priorities, allocating resources,
and projecting and planning for future needs. We also use data to identify risk factors and improve prevention and mitigation
strategies for future disasters.

WHAT IS DISASTER EPIDEMIOLOGY?

Disaster epidemiology is the use of epidemiology to assess the short- and long-term adverse health effects of disasters and to
predict consequences of future disasters. Typically, the main objectives of disaster epidemiology are to

e prevent or reduce the number of deaths, illnesses, and injuries caused by disasters,
e provide timely and accurate health information for decision-makers, and

e improve prevention and mitigation strategies for future disasters by gaining information for future response
preparation.

WHAT TOOLS ARE AVAILABLE FOR STATE, TRIBAL, LOCAL, AND TERRITORIAL (STLT) HEALTH DEPARTMENT TO USE DURING
DISASTER RESPONSE?

STLT health departments should look first at the tools they are using in non-disaster settings to assess their applicability for
adaption to a disaster response. However, CDC provides various tools for public health disaster response including template
forms for morbidity surveillance, mortality surveillance, shelter assessments, and the Community Assessment for Public
Health Emergency Response, CASPER toolkit B§ [PDF - 23.2 MB].

HOW DO STATE AND LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS REQUEST CDC ASSISTANCE?

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/disaster/faqs.htm



Page 69: 5/11/24, 3:01 PM CDC - Health Studies - Disaster Epidemiology - Frequently Asked Questions

CDC Health Studies (HS) provides scientific consultation, technical assistance, and disaster epidemiology training to state,
tribal, local, territorial (STLT), federal, and international public health partners to help them respond to natural and man-made
disasters. There are several ways you can request CDC assistance. If you would like more information on CDC HS consultation,
technical assistance, or disaster epidemiology training, please click here.

Public Health Surveillance During a Disaster

WHAT IS PUBLIC HEALTH SURVEILLANCE?

Public health surveillance is the systematic collection, analysis, and interpretation of deaths, injuries, and illnesses in order to
provide information about any adverse health effects related to a disaster event in a community. It allows us to assess the
human health impacts of a disaster and evaluate potential problems related to planning and prevention.

WHY CONDUCT PUBLIC HEALTH SURVEILLANCE DURING DISASTER RESPONSE?

Public health morbidity surveillance allows us to detect disease outbreaks and track disease trends. Acommon myth is that
epidemics are inevitable during a disaster. Early detection and response, however, can lessen the likelihood for outbreaks.
Additionally, conducting health surveillance allows public health leaders and decision makers to make informed decisions
about action items such as allocating resources, targeting interventions to meet specific needs, and planning for future
disasters. In addition to public health morbidity surveillance, mortality surveillance can provide information that can prevent
excess death. The number of deaths is a strong indicator of the impact of the disaster. Disasters can overwhelm local medical
examiners and emergency systems, disrupting typical reporting methods. Most mortality surveillance data (such as Vital
Statistics) are collected in a way that is not timely or detailed enough to be useful for disaster response. Thus, implementing
active mortality surveillance following a disaster provides a critical aspect to response.

WHAT TOOLS ARE AVAILABLE TO ASSIST IN CONDUCTING SURVEILLANCE DURING A DISASTER?

Health Studies has developed multiple ready-to-use templates for mortality and morbidity surveillance. These tools can
supplement existing surveillance systems or replace surveillance systems that have been hindered or destroyed due to a
disaster. For more information, review the Materials and Resources page

HOW DO WE CREATE A SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM DURING A DISASTER?

During disasters, several steps may need to be conducted simultaneously when planning a surveillance system. Just as
purpose and objective should be clear in any disaster response effort, the surveillance system should have well-defined
objectives. Additionally, data sources need to be identified and selected. Facility-based surveillance of hospitals and
emergency medical operations can provide information on those seeking care during a disaster, yet there is often the need to
use additional nontraditional sources of information (such as a shelters, pharmacies, or physician offices) as well. Ideally, data
collection instruments for surveillance should be developed, tested, and distributed before the disaster occurs (e.g., CDC-
developed surveillance tools). However, these instruments will need to be modified for each disaster and location. The data
collection instrument should collect only the most essential information and should have easy data entry. For information to
be useful, it must be disseminated in a timely fashion through appropriate channels (e.g., public health and other government
officials, relief workers, the affected community, and the media).

Community Assessment for Public Health Emergency Response (CASPER)

Please see the CASPER FAQ page.
Page last reviewed: September 23, 2019

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/disaster/faqs.htm



Page 70: 5/11/24, 3:00 PM CDC - Health Studies - Public Health Surveillance during a Disaster
Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Disaster Epidemiology & Response Home

Public Health surveillance During a Disaster

During a disaster, it is important to conduct surveillance to determine the extent and scope of the health effects on the
affected populations. Surveillance is the systematic collection, analysis, and interpretation of death, injury, and illness data,
which enables public health to identify adverse health effects in the community. Disaster surveillance allows us to identify risk
factors, track disease trends, determine action items, and target interventions. It allows us to assess the human health
impacts of a disaster and evaluate potential problems related to planning and prevention. While each disaster is different,
there are similarities among them and we can apply knowledge learned from each response to the next disaster. Disaster
surveillance is often categorized broadly as mortality and morbidity surveillance.

Mortality Surveillance

Mortality surveillance measures death in a population. It is an important indicator of the gravity of a disaster. Identifying the
leading cause(s) and circumstances of death can help guide immediate and future prevention strategies. Health studies has
developed tools and guidelines to help partners with disaster mortality surveillance including the following:

e Guidance for Certification of Deaths in the Event of a Natural, Human-Induced, or Chemical/Radiological Disaster JB
[PDF - 3 MB]

¢ Death Scene Investigation Toolkit BR [PDF - 1.44 MB]
e Reference Guide for Death Certification ~R [PDF - 945 KB]

e Disaster-Related Mortality Surveillance Form.

NCEH, in coordination with the National Center for Health Statistics, has also developed an eLearning on the Guidance for
Certification of Deaths in the Event of a Natural, Human-Induced, or Radiological/Chemical Disaster designed for Medical
Examiners (MEs)/Coroners and physicians. See Materials and Resources for more information.

Morbidity Surveillance

Morbidity surveillance during a disaster allows for the detection of potential disease outbreaks and track disease and injury
trends. Acommon myth is that epidemics are inevitable during a disaster. However, epidemics do not spontaneously occur
and public health surveillance can mitigate the likelinood for outbreaks through early detection and response. NCEH works

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/disaster/surveillance.htm



Page 71: 5/11/24, 3:00 PM CDC - Health Studies - Public Health Surveillance during a Disaster

closely with American Red Cross, STLT jurisdictions, and other CDC centers to conduct disaster surveillance during a response.
The following tools and guidelines are available to help partners with disaster morbidity surveillance:

e Primer for Understanding the Principles and Practices of Disaster Surveillance [3 [PDF - 9 MB]
¢ Guidance for Emergency Managers for Identifying At-Risk Groups BB [PDF - 12.2 MB]

e Several morbidity surveillance templates to be used in acute situations such as shelters.

NCEH has developed an eLearning on Disaster Surveillance to provide partners with an overview of disaster surveillance. See
Materials and Resources for more information

¢ Community Assessment for Public Health Emergency Response (CASPER)
e CDC Emergency Preparedness and Response

e¢ CDC Natural Disaster and Extreme Weather Events

e Radiation Emergencies

e Disaster Epidemiology: FAQs

e Public Health Assessment and Surveillance after a Disaster

¢ CSTE Disaster Epidemiology Subcommittee 4

e NIH Disaster Research Response (DR2) 4

e Recent Publications in Disaster Epidemiology

Last Reviewed: December 14, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/disaster/surveillance.htm

2/2



Page 72: 5/11/24, 2:00 PM CDC and EPA Create Effective Sampling Method to Clear Public Chemical Warfare Agent Incidents on Fishing Vessels | NCEH | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Chemical Weapons Elimination Home

CDC and EPA Create Effective Sampling Method to Clear
Public Chemical Warfare Agent Incidents on Fishing
Vessels

Differences in collecting mustard samples led to confusion

On June 6, 2010, the ESS Pursuit, a clamming vessel, pulled up a World War | era mustard-filled munition in its catch. One of
the crew members saw that the munition was leaking, so he grabbed it and threw it overboard. The fisherman later
developed blisters on his hands and thigh from touching the sulfur mustard.

This mustard exposure was the first time in the United States that sampling methods for a chemical warfare agent (CWA) had
to be developed for private fishing vessels, clam cages, storage warehouses, and transportation containers.

Y —

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) were both contacted to
determine workers’ exposure levels and the boat's contamination levels. To complete these activities, mustard samples had to
be collected. Because the different government agencies had different approaches to sample collection, the reported mustard
contamination levels were different. The differences resulted in fishing companies missing fishing days and confusion about
when it was safe for the fishermen to go back to work. This incident highlighted the need for one standard method to sample
a contaminated vessel, also known as clearance sampling.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/success-stories/sampling-method-fishing-vessels.html 1/2



Page 73: 5/11/24, 2:00 PM CDC and EPA Create Effective Sampling Method to Clear Public Chemical Warfare Agent Incidents on Fishing Vessels | NCEH | CDC

CDC and EPA create improved method of mustard sampling

CDC's Chemical Demilitarization Program collaborated with EPA to create an improved method of sampling. This new
approach uses a combination of air level readings (air sampling) and wiping the surface area of objects (wipe sampling [4) to
determine mustard exposure levels. This method was very effective, as it cuts down on confusion. Reports now include both
kinds of sampling data with clear recommendations, making it easier to understand for fishing companies or others involved
in CWA contamination events. Plus, the combined method can be used in other settings besides fishing boats, like buildings or
facilities.

Standardized mustard sampling method can help with future incidents
ESS Pursuit’s captain and crew indicated that an incident like the one from 2010 could happen again. They recover munitions

during every fishing trip. Because we have a sampling process in place, CDC, EPA, the U.S. Coast Guard, and other partners

are prepared to handle future CWA contamination events in any setting.
Last Reviewed: July 31, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/success-stories/sampling-method-fishing-vessels.html

2/2



Page 74: 5/11/24, 2:00 PM CDC Assists in Eliminating Entire Nerve Agent VX Stockpile and its Threat to Public Health

Espafiol | Other Languages

Chemical Weapons Elimination Home

CDC Assists in Eliminating Entire Nerve Agent VX
Stockpile and its Threat to Public Health

The VX threat

In 1997, the United States approved the Chemical Weapons Convention, an international treaty to destroy all chemical
weapons. This was a major task because the United States had multiple facilities that housed about 30,500 tons of chemical
warfare weapons. Among these weapons, over 4,500 tons were VX, a human-made chemical warfare agent and one of the
most toxic nerve agents. VX is 600 times more toxic than chlorine and one of the deadliest chemicals in existence. Exposure to
large doses of VX in any way, like touching or getting it in your mouth or eyes, may result in numerous health problems that
can possibly lead to death.

When chemical weapons like VX are left in storage for a long time, the threat to public health increases due to communities’
and the country’s potential exposure to toxic agents caused by the munitions degrading. Congress looked to HHS and CDC to
make sure worker and public safety and health were protected during the destruction process. Because CDC's Chemical
Demilitarization Program has the resources, capabilities, and expertise, they led the public health oversight for the
destruction of the entire U.S stockpile of nerve agent VX.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/success-stories/eliminating-vx-stockpile.html 1/2



Page 75: 5/11/24, 2:00 PM CDC Assists in Eliminating Entire Nerve Agent VX Stockpile and its Threat to Public Health

CDC helps ensure safe destruction of nerve agent VX stockpile

For the past 40 years, CDC has provided independent oversight to the U.S. chemical weapons destruction program. CDC helps
ensure the safe destruction of chemical warfare material for protection of public health. Their responsibilities include
monitoring air quality in and around the facilities, observing demonstrations of the destruction process, and reviewing
potential safety concerns. The following list shows specific actions the program has taken to keep the public safe during the
destruction of nerve agent VX:

e Partnering with agencies - Partnering with regional and state environmental protection agencies, health departments,
and federal agencies, such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), Department of Defense (DoD), and Army chemical agent destruction programs to share information on best
practices

e Conducting safety reviews - Conducting on-site safety reviews of operational readiness, process safety, industrial
hygiene, and medical clinics

¢ Developing criteria - Developing chemical agent air exposure limits [47 with a margin of safety to protect workers and
the nearby community; also preventing exposure by review of VX agent monitoring and quality assurance, personnel
protective equipment, and air handling

¢ Participating in committees - Participating in the Chemical Demilitarization Citizens’ Advisory Commissions (CAC) 4
to provide health-based resources to support state and local health professionals on chemical agent-related issues and
the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program (CSPEPP) [4

Public health threat eliminated along with destruction of toxic chemicals

Not only was public and worker health protected, but also the VX stockpile elimination project was complete on April 19, 2022.

CDC achieved its goal of destroying the chemical stockpile more than a year and a half earlier than expected. The goal was to
destroy the chemical weapons stockpile by September 30, 2023. These efforts demonstrate the commitment of the United

States to the destruction and elimination of the use of chemical weapons.
Last Reviewed: July 31, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/success-stories/eliminating-vx-stockpile.html

2/2



Page 76: 5/11/24, 2:00 PM CDC Develops Guidance for Fishermen when Encountering Munitions at Sea
Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

+

2apons Elimination

Chemical W

Chemical Weapons Elimination Home

CDC Develops Guidance for Fishermen when
Encountering Munitions at Sea

Chemical Weapons at Sea Put Fisherman in Danger

ER ies ui ‘ 2M ’
Before the 1970s, the U.S. Army's Operation CHASE (acronym for “Cut Holes and Sink Em”) called for the disposal of surplus,

out-of-date, unusable chemical weapons at sea. The chemical agents in these weapons are now an emerging public health
problem, especially for fishing workers and seafood production facilities. Chemical weapons can be tangled in fishing nets or
accidentally disturbed during commercial fishing, clamming, and dredging.

A single incident involving chemical weapons on a fishing vessel can result in serious health threats. These include injury to
vessel crewmembers, contamination of the boat, and potential contamination of the seafood part of the nation’s food supply.

Five known incidents have occurred in the past 20 years where fishermen were exposed to or had direct contact with
chemical munitions at sea. Vessel crew members did not know what to do, resulting in unintentional injuries and
contamination.

Recovery of Sea-Disposed
Chemical Warfare Material

CDC Develops Chemical Munitions Response Kit

CDC and the interagency workgroup developed a response kit for commercial fishermen encountering chemical munitions.
The kit includes the following:

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/success-stories/guidance-for-fisherman-encountering-munitions.html



Page 77: 5/11/24, 2:00 PM CDC Develops Guidance for Fishermen when Encountering Munitions at Sea

e Recommendations
© Personal protective equipment—instructions on how to use equipment like gloves and masks to help prevent
exposure
© Safe munition handling 9 [PDF - 227 KB]—directions on how to report the incident and safely handle the munition

e Resource card B§ [PDF - 77 KB]—helps identify signs and symptoms of exposure and provides information for
healthcare providers treating exposed fishing workers

CDC shared the response kit with industry and with government partners, including the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, U.S. Coast Guard, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, and state public and environmental health agencies
that may provide help during the incidents.

CDC Resource Keeps Fishing Workers Safe and Healthy

Since the development of the response kit, the resource card has been the Chemical Demilitarization Program’s most popular
webpage and has the most downloads. As of June 2023, it has been viewed over 19,500 times, accounting for 28.2% of the
program's website visits. The response kit and its resources have been downloaded 385 times. The kit ensures fishermen and
treatment facilities know how to recognize munitions, properly handle munitions, safely put on and remove personal
protective equipment, decontaminate surfaces, and recognize signs and symptoms of exposure.

Last Reviewed: July 31, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/success-stories/guidance-for-fisherman-encountering-munitions.html

2/2



Page 78: 5/11/24, 2:01 PM CDC Participation in the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Chemical Weapons Elimination Home"

CDC's Role in Protecting Public Health in During
Chemical Demilitarization

Learn about major events during
the chemical demilitarization program.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) provides recommendations to the U. S. Department of Defense (DoD)
chemical demilitarization program to ensure the safe destruction of chemical warfare material for protection of public health.
CDC makes recommendations regarding both recovered chemical weapons and other chemical agent material and the
completed destruction of the U.S. stockpile of chemical weapons.

In 1970, Congress passed PL 91-121/441 (50 USC 1512). This law directed what is now the Department of Health and Human

Services (HHS) and the Office of the Surgeon General (OSG) to review DoD plans to transport, test, or dispose of lethal
chemical agents, and to recommend actions to protect the public’s health and safety during such activities.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/cdc_participation.htm#print

114



Page 79: 5/11/24, 2:01 PM CDC Participation in the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program | CDC

2) a) ce) a oe | oe

Stockpiled Chemical Weapons

Read our success stories.
CDC helps ensure safe destruction of chemical warfare material and protect public health and safety by

e Reviewing DoD’s plans for disposing of chemical warfare agents. This review includes staffing and design specifications
for system safeguards and performance. CDC also recommends precautionary measures to avoid potential hazards and
protect public health and safety.

e Observing required readiness demonstrations before any chemical warfare agent destruction operation begins.
e Conducting periodic on-site inspections during long-term destruction operations.

e Reviewing biweekly reports of air monitoring data for quality assurance at operating and closing stockpile destruction
facilities.

e Recommending chemical warfare agent airborne exposure limits to protect the public and the workers who dispose of
those chemical warfare agents.

e Reviewing plans for closing chemical disposal facilities, including decontaminating, dismantling, and demolishing the
chemical warfare agent disposal equipment and buildings.

e Assessing the public health effects of any unintended disposal-related exposure to a chemical warfare agent.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/cdc_participation.htm#print 2/4



Page 80: 5/11/24, 2:01 PM CDC Participation in the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program | CDC

Workers celebrating 400th
Demilitarization Protective Ensemble Entry

Collaborating with state and local authorities to respond to public health concerns about chemical warfare agent
disposal.

Reviewing plans for transporting any chemical warfare agents.

e Evaluating the medical program at each chemical agent disposal facility. Ensure the medical clinic, staff, procedures, and
plans can meet occupational medicine challenges, including emergencies related to chemical agent disposal.

Participating in the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program.

CDC's Role in the Offsite Shipment of Secondary Waste

e The U.S. Army disposes of some secondary wastes offsite at hazardous waste treatment and disposal facilities. CDC
continues to monitor public health aspects of treating secondary waste by reviewing documentation provided by the U.
S. Army and its contractors. Documents typically provided to CDC include information on characterization of the waste,
specific plans for health and safety, and the risk associated with transportation. Any offsite shipment approach should
clearly demonstrate that any human health and safety risks are fully considered and satisfactorily addressed.

¢ More information about secondary chemical agent waste is available in the National Research Council's (NRC) Review of
Chemical Agent Secondary Waste Disposal and Regulatory Requirements, 2007. [4 The NRC is the operating arm of the
United States National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. More information about the NRC can be found
at National Academies webpage. 4

Additional Resources

e Publications and other documents (cdc.gov)

e Prediction of acute mammalian toxicity using QSAR methods: a case study of sulfur mustard and its breakdown products
(cdc.gov) 4

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/cdc_participation.htm#print

3/4



Page 81: 5/11/24, 2:01 PM CDC Participation in the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Preparedness Program | CDC

e Notes from the Field: Exposures to Discarded Sulfur Mustard Munitions — Mid-Atlantic and New England States 2004-
2012 (cdc.gov)

e Emergency Room Procedures in Chemical Hazard Emergencies: A Job Aid (cdc.gov) (Archived content)
Last Reviewed: October 16, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/cdc_participation.htm#print

44



Page 82: 5/11/24, 2:23 PM CDC's Building Resilience Against Climate Effects (BRACE) Framework | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Climate and Health Home

CDC's Building Resilience Against Climate Effects
(BRACE) Framework

ee HL

Climate Impacts EI
and Assessing Projecting the
Vulnerabilities Disease Burden

O2

O5

Evaluating
Impact and
proving Quality
of Activities

BRACE

Building Resilience

Against Climate Effects Jatersnr)
Public Health
Interventions

OA es | OS

Implementing a
Climate and Health
Adaptation Plan

The Building Resilience Against Climate Effects (BRACE) framework is a five-step process that allows health officials to develop
strategies and programs to help communities prepare for the health effects of climate change. Part of this effort involves
incorporating complex atmospheric data and both short and long range climate projections into public health planning and
response activities. Combining atmospheric data and projections with epidemiologic analysis allows health officials to more
effectively anticipate, prepare for, and respond to a range of climate sensitive health impacts.

Five sequential steps comprise the BRACE framework:

Step 1: Anticipate Climate Impacts and Assess Vulnerabilities

Identify the scope of climate impacts, associated potential health outcomes, and populations and locations vulnerable to
these health impacts.

Climate Models and the Use of Climate Projections: A Brief Overview for Health Departments (A [PDF - 1.50 MB]

Assessing health vulnerability to climate change: A guide for health departments BM [PDF - 4.35 MB]

Step 2: Project the Disease Burden
Estimate or quantify the additional burden of health outcomes associated with climate change.

Projecting Climate-Related Disease Burden: A Guide for Health Departments [PDF - 7.6 MB] B

Projecting Climate-Related Disease Burden: A Case Study on Methods for Projecting Respiratory Health Impacts pdf icon[PDF
- 3.16 MB] B

Step 3: Assess Public Health Interventions
Identify the most suitable health interventions for the identified health impacts of greatest concern.

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/BRACE.htm



Page 83: 5/11/24, 2:23 PM CDC's Building Resilience Against Climate Effects (BRACE) Framework | CDC

Climate and Health Intervention Assessment: Evidence on Public Health Interventions to Prevent the Negative Health Effects
of Climate Change [PDF - 6.91 MB] 8

Step 4: Develop and Implement a Climate and Health Adaptation Plan

Develop a written adaptation plan that is regularly updated. Disseminate and oversee implementation of the plan.
Adaptation Action and Evaluation Plan Template (AAEP) 2 [PDF - 301 KB]

Adaptation in Action: CRSCI Grantee Success Stories 4

Step 5: Evaluate Impact and Improve Quality of Activities
Evaluate the process. Determine the value of information attained and activities undertaken.

CDC's Climate and Health Evaluation page provides more information on monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of
climate and health work.

More in-depth information about the BRACE framework can be found in the document titled Building Resilience against

Climate Effects—A Novel Framework to Facilitate Climate Readiness in Public Health Agencies [4 .. An animated video
describing the BRACE framework is also available.

Justice, Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion are key components of BRACE

Because justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion (EDI) principles are crucial to climate change adaptation planning, CDC has
partnered with the American Public Health Association (APHA) to create the Climate Change and Health Playbook:
Adaptation Planning for Justice, Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion [4 . This comprehensive, step-by-step resource is
designed to supplement BRACE and support public health departments and adaptation planners as they blend JEDI into their
climate and health efforts. Learn more about climate justice and how CDC is supporting public health departments and

climate adaptation planners as they incorporate JED! principles into their BRACE efforts.
Last Reviewed: October 31, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/BRACE.htm



Page 84: 5/11/24, 2:22 PM CDC's Climate-Ready States & Cities Initiative | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Climate and Health Home

CDC's Climate-Ready States & Cities Initiative

CDC is using its public health expertise to help state, tribal, local, and territorial health departments prepare for and respond
to the health effects that a changing climate may bring to their communities. Likely impacts include increased extreme

weather events, wildfires, decreased air quality, and illnesses transmitted by food, water, and disease carriers such as
mosquitoes and ticks.

CDC's Climate-Ready States and Cities Initiative (CRSCI) is helping grant recipients from 13 jurisdictions use the five-step
Building Resilience Against Climate Effects (BRACE) framework to identify likely climate impacts in their communities, potential
health effects associated with these impacts, and their most at-risk populations and locations. The BRACE framework then
helps our grant recipients develop and implement health adaptation plans and address gaps in critical public health functions
and services.

The Climate and Health Program also funds partners through the “Strengthening Public Health Systems and Services Through
National Partnerships to Improve and Protect the Nation’s Health 3” program managed by CDC's, National Center for State,
Tribal, Local, and Territorial Public Health Infrastructure and Workforce. These partners support tribes and territories’ climate
and health work.

Specifically, the National Indian Health Board funds tribes through the Climate-Ready Tribes Program [4, while the
Association of State and Territorial Health Officials 4 supports climate and health work in territorial health departments. In
addition, the National Association of County and City Health Officials 4 supports three jurisdictions in their ongoing climate
change and health adaptation initiatives at the local level.

For more information on health department activities funded by CDC, see “Preparing for the Regional Health Impacts of
Climate Change in the United States.” BB [PDF - 4 MB]

For more information on the CRSCI or our work with tribes and territories, please contact our program at

climateandhealth@cdc.gov.
Last Reviewed: September 15, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/climate_ready.htm



Page 85: 5/11/24, 2:02 PM Chemical Weapons Elimination - Air Monitoring for Chemical Warfare Agents Fact Sheet | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

CDC Centers for Disease —
Y Control and Prevention

Chemical Weapons Elimination Home

Chemical Agent Air Monitoring

Air Monitoring Technology

Chemical agent monitoring is critical to ensure protection of the environment, workers, and nearby residents.

e Specially designed equipment called near-real-time monitors collects air samples and gives a reading a few minutes after
each sample is collected.

e Other monitors collect samples of air over longer periods of time to find out if very low levels of chemical agents are
present.

e Monitors and air-sampling systems are placed strategically throughout the disposal system and within the exhaust
system, and outside at stockpile destruction facilities.

If results show chemical agent, the facility takes corrective action, even if levels are well below those that could harm people.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/amcwafs.htm

114



Page 86: 5/11/24, 2:02 PM Chemical Weapons Elimination - Air Monitoring for Chemical Warfare Agents Fact Sheet | CDC

MINICAMS® air monitor
Photo provided by the Program Executive Office, Assembled Chemical Weapons Alternatives Program

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/amcwafs.htm

2/4



Page 87: 5/11/24, 2:02 PM Chemical Weapons Elimination - Air Monitoring for Chemical Warfare Agents Fact Sheet | CDC

ie]

DAAMS air monitor
Photo provided by the Program Manager for Chemical Demilitarization

Improvements in Technology

CDC promotes continual improvements in air-monitoring technology for the chemical agent disposal program. CDC endorses
the important goals of

e Improving chemical agent detection and sensitivity levels
e Avoiding interferents that may cause the instrument to incorrectly indicate the presence of agent.

e Reducing sampling and analytical time for near-real-time instruments
CDC regularly conducts oversight visits to examine air-monitoring systems and makes recommendations to improve them.
CDC helps ensure that chemical monitors are operating accurately. CDC staff are involved in the following activities:

e Reviewing the U.S. Department of Defense’s monitoring plans before they are implemented,

e Checking agent-monitoring locations to ensure that enough of monitors are in use and that they are sampling the proper
locations,

e Analyzing quality data from each monitor to ensure that the system's readings are reliable,

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/amcwafs.htm

3/4



Page 88: 5/11/24, 2:02 PM Chemical Weapons Elimination - Air Monitoring for Chemical Warfare Agents Fact Sheet | CDC

e Conducting periodic process safety and industrial hygiene surveys.
Last Reviewed: October 13, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/amcwafs.htm 4l4



Page 89: 5/11/24, 4:00 PM Childhood Lead Poisoning | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

fi DC Centers for Disease ©
x Control and Prevention

Home

Childhood Lead Poisoning

Note: Childhood lead poisoning data on CDC's Tracking Network is currently unavailable. Updated data will be available
soon.

We Track That

Older homes can have peeling or chipping lead-based paint and high levels of lead-contaminated dust, and have young

children living in them. Having measures for blood lead levels (BLLs) and a measure for age of housing together on the
Tracking Network can help assess testing within areas of high risk.

Types of Data

Age of Housing

This indicator uses census data to provide information about the number of homes built before 1950 and homes built
from 1950-1979. Living in an older home is one risk factor that can contribute to higher blood lead levels in children.
Census data do not account for the number of older houses that have been renovated or have had lead removed; and
this indicator does not consider other sources of lead in the community.

Data Highlight

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ChildhoodLeadPoisoning.htm

114



Page 90: 5/11/24, 4:00 PM Childhood Lead Poisoning | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

View childhood lead poisoning data in maps, charts, or tables using the Tracking Network's data explorer tool.

Data in Action

By tracking children with lead poisoning and sources of lead, we can:

e identify children at risk in order to target testing and resources;

e connect children with elevated BLLs to recommended services;

e monitor progress towards eliminating childhood lead poisoning;

e identify and monitor trends in lead sources that are exposing children to lead;
e remove and reduce sources of lead; and

e develop and evaluate lead poisoning interventions and programs.
Read these success stories to learn about childhood lead poisoning related work in our funded Tracking Programs.

lowa | Kansas | Maine | Massachusetts | New Jersey | Pennsylvania | South Carolina | Utah | Washington

Learn More

e Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program

e Blood Lead Reference Value

Related Content Areas

e Race/ethnicity and living in poverty are risk factors that can contribute to higher blood lead levels in children. You can
view these data under Populations and Vulnerabilities.

e Biomonitoring: Population Exposures has data on the concentration of lead in blood for the U.S. population.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ChildhoodLeadPoisoning.htm

2/4



Page 91: 5/11/24, 4:00 PM Childhood Lead Poisoning | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Explore Childhood Lead Poisoning Data

Data Explorer

x

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ChildhoodLeadPoisoning.htm

3/4



Page 92: 5/11/24, 4:00 PM Childhood Lead Poisoning | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Corton fevge © dal ere

renee fog BH

aR men Pein om ng Be Pte et pee ge er ey ed Ea

dere rye seg eee | Pa od ce ee ee ee. rd ed ed!

dade Popesieres ary Ble | Perce col acieiy pee chee eed eit andres. wo ert Serco bee ne aed a |
Pa Pie Bl Pe ee hel ee de ed ee ee es eee ee ee ee ee ee ed ee
Berek: Peeve ra | Pairk eb A eS a 9! Wd oh
ee ee Bo ee Be al

Paar ak: Peri a ea Re, ame od eee) ieee i (Dad ea ae

dave Payee ere eee | red cd ca ee ed nr LS ad
fata"

dai Peters ere ees Peel aches i ee ee oe ee ee rerio 9 ead or es ed em acl

cme
PAST ied: Persie nhs a ies oe Peek ee i et Pome to
Cakes
dare. Pa ee es Par ot on ae ee ee
Cnicey

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: June 27, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ChildhoodLeadPoisoning.htm



Page 93: 5/11/24, 4:00 PM Children's Environmental Health | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Children’s Environmental Health

We Track That

Children are not little adults—their bodies are not the same as adult bodies. Because they are small and still developing, they
are more easily exposed to environmental contaminants and here's why:

e Children breathe more air, drink more water, and eat more food per pound of body weight than adults.
e Children are more likely to put their hands in their mouth.
e Achild’s body may not be able to break down and get rid of harmful contaminants that enter their body.

e Health problems from an environmental exposure can take years to develop. Because they are young, children have
more time to develop health conditions and diseases than adults who are exposed later in their life.

Types of Data

The Tracking Network's information on children’s environmental health can help you understand how you can protect
children from environmental exposures so they can live a safer, healthier lives.

Asthma V

Asthma Prevalence among Children

Prevalence estimates are organized by different variables to estimate the number of people with asthma in different time
periods and geographic areas, such as states and counties. These data are collected from the Behavior Risk Factor
Surveillance Survey (BRFSS), CDC's National Asthma Control Program's Asthma Call-back Survey (ACBS), and from CDC's
Population Level Analysis and Community Estimates (PLACES) Project. PLACES data on the Tracking Network are available
at the census tract level for all 50 states.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ChildrensEnvironmentalHealth.htm

115



Page 94: 5/11/24, 4:00 PM Children's Environmental Health | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Cancer Vv

These indicators allow for a better understanding of spatial and temporal patterns of selected cancers suggested to be
linked to environmental exposures within states. The number of cases provides cancer burden for a specific geography
and/or population subgroup; age-adjusted rates allow people to compare cancer occurrence across larger geographic
areas and/or population subgroups. Such information is vital for hypothesis generating and further developing linkage
studies to evaluate environmental impacts on cancer. These data come from U.S. Cancer Statistics, which includes cancer
incidence data from the CDC's National Program of Cancer Registries and NCI’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End
Results Program [4. Indicators include:

e Incidence of Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia
e Incidence of Acute Myeloid Leukemia
e Incidence of Brain and Central Nervous System Cancer

e Incidence of Leukemia

Childhood Lead Poisoning Ww

Age of Housing

This indicator uses census data to provide information about the number of homes built before 1950 and homes built
from 1950-1979. Living in an older home is one risk factor that can contribute to higher blood lead levels in children.
Census data do not account for the number of older houses that have been renovated or have had lead removed; and
this indicator does not consider other sources of lead in the community.

Developmental Disabilities Vv

The developmental disabilities data are provided by two sources the U.S. Department of Education and CDC's Autism and
Developmental Disability Monitoring Network. Data are available at the state level for different age groups. Not all states
or years are represented in the data. The Tracking Network has data for two developmental disability indicators:

e Children receiving interventions or services

e Estimated prevalence of autism

Population Characteristics and Vulnerabilities Vv

These indicators can help determine how health problems and disease can happen in a population, or group of people,
over time. These characteristics may be related to the number of new and existing cases of a particular disease in

children. Socioeconomic factors, such as education, occupation, and income, are conditions that may affect how children
live. Indicators include:

e Demographics
e Life expectancy
e Social Vulnerability Index (ATSDR)

e Socioeconomic status

Data Highlight

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ChildrensEnvironmentalHealth.htm

2/5



Page 95: 5/11/24, 4:00 PM Children's Environmental Health | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

S_] it~ te

ie Bie.. e_
Bit oli
=i lTE  ' Le

View different children’s environmental health data sets side-by-side on our Data Explorer tool. Try it!

Learn More

¢ Child Development
e FastStats: Child Health

e Parent Information

Resources

e Association of Maternal and Child Health Programs [4
¢ Children’s Environmental Health Network [4

e Environmental Protection Agency 4

e EPA-America’s Children and the Environment [4

¢ National Institute of Environmental Health Studies /

¢ Children’s Environmental Health Infographic

Explore Children's Environmental Health Data

Data Explorer

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ChildrensEnvironmentalHealth.htm

3/5



Page 96: 5/11/24, 4:00 PM

x

Children's Environmental Health | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

larger” feceg & i eee
rem
Ce ee
denna Payee oe ed
dae Pee are Bes
fale ee oe oe ey Gadel
jared es Be

Gade Poe oe ee ey Bs has.

Aik Pee ees

dees Pyare pr Bees

date Pe ere are eis

et ee
Ceci

ve yee ee

View data in simple charts

Peed
Dr oe ed

bem pe wk
Pe ceed tol ech
Poarcerl col wciaiis

filed = a

iar oe a
aa”) a

—

ce

FE Ae eS

E SER SS oe Po SS

me be ec 0 ed ee

A a ss sR a

rt 2b ee ee eed eee el ee

el ely 2 ei 2 ies La 2 ee er el

OP Br ee waeig Tsai ss Ha UE ss Ee a PS

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ChildrensEnvironmentalHealth.htm

45



Page 97: 5/11/24, 4:00 PM

API

Children's Environmental Health | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: February 15, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ChildrensEnvironmentalHealth.htm

5/5



Page 98: 5/11/24, 4:01 PM Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

CD za Centers for Disease
> Control and Prevention

National ENviront

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)

We Track That

The Tracking Network uses data from the U.S. Census Bureau [%, hospital and emergency department databases provided by
state and/or local health departments, and death certificates from the National Center for Health Statistics to calculate state
and local data about COPD.

Types of Data

The Tracking Network provides data about health effects due to Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD). These data
can be used to assess the burden of COPD, monitor trends over time, identify high-risk groups, and enhance prevention,
education, and evaluation efforts.

COPD Emergency Department Visits 4

This indicator uses data from state emergency department records and the U.S. Census Bureau. It estimates the number
and rate of emergency department visits for COPD. These data can be used to identify trends and patterns of emergency
department visits over time and in different geographic areas, such as states and counties.

COPD Hospitalizations 4

This indicator uses data collected by hospitals and estimates the number and rate of people who were admitted to the
hospital due to COPD. It can be used to identify trends and patterns in COPD hospitalizations across time and space. This
data may be compared with other risk factors, such as air pollution, to identify at-risk populations and environmental
relationships.

COPD Mortality **
This indicator uses data from death certificates to evaluate deaths that have identified COPD as an underlying cause.

4 These data are supplied by health departments funded by the CDC Tracking Program.

**These data are obtained from death certificate records (Mortality Multiple Cause files) from the National Center for Health Statistics.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/COPD.htm

114



Page 99: 5/11/24, 4:01 PM Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) | Tracking | NCEH | CDC.

Data Limitations

These data come from hospital records, but individuals may have COPD exacerbations due to exposure to an
environmental risk factor that do not result in a hospital visit which are not reflected in this data. This limits the ability to
compare data across states. In addition, death investigation laws and reporting vary by place. This limits the ability to
compare mortality data across locations.

Data Highlight

a
,  M

ASS
—EE |
bs

Add layers to any map.
Click on the gear icon to select layers: surface smoke, current radar, transportation noise, active Atlantic cyclones. Try it!

Data in Action

Tracking COPD in a standard way over time can help us

e assess the burden of COPD

e examine trends over time

e identify high-risk groups in need of targeted intervention
e assess geographic differences; and

e enhance prevention, education, and evaluation efforts.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/COPD.htm



Page 100: 5/11/24, 4:01 PM Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Read these success stories to learn about the COPD related work happening in our funded Tracking Programs.

Minnesota

Learn More

¢ COPD Information from CDC

e Tips from Former Smokers - Smoking and COPD

Related Content Areas
e Air Pollution

e Asthma

Explore Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) Data

Data Explorer

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/COPD.htm

3/4



Page 101: 5/11/24, 4:01 PM Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) | Tracking | NCEH | CDC.

Corton fevge © dal ere

renee fog BH

aR men Pein om ng Be Pte et pee ge er ey ed Ea

dere rye seg eee | Pa od ce ee ee ee. rd ed ed!

dade Popesieres ary Ble | Perce col acieiy pee chee eed eit andres. wo ert Serco bee ne aed a |
Pa Pie Bl Pe ee hel ee de ed ee ee es eee ee ee ee ee ee ed ee
Berek: Peeve ra | Pairk eb A eS a 9! Wd oh
ee ee Bo ee Be al

Paar ak: Peri a ea Re, ame od eee) ieee i (Dad ea ae

dave Payee ere eee | red cd ca ee ed nr LS ad
fata"

dai Peters ere ees Peel aches i ee ee oe ee ee rerio 9 ead or es ed em acl

cme
PAST ied: Persie nhs a ies oe Peek ee i et Pome to
Cakes
dare. Pa ee es Par ot on ae ee ee
Cnicey

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/COPD.htm



Page 102: 5/11/24, 2:23 PM Climate and Health Adaptation in Action | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Climate and Health Home

Climate and Health Adaptation in Action

Successes of CDC's Climate-Ready States and Cities Initiative
Download and print this page BR [PDF - 549 KB, HTML]

CDC's Climate and Health Program helps states, cities, territories, and tribes protect human health from a changing climate.
CDC provides data, tools, and technical guidance to help U.S. health agencies reduce vulnerability and increase resilience to
the health effects of climate change.

CDC's Climate-Ready States and Cities Initiative (CRSCI) currently funds and provides technical assistance to state and
local health departments. CRSCI grantees use the Building Resilience Against Climate Effects (BRACE) framework to
identify and estimate the health effects of climate change in their communities, choose public health interventions for the
health impacts of greatest concern, and develop and implement climate health adaptation plans.

Studying health effects from a changing climate presents challenges. Health impacts vary by location, and climate adaptation
actions must be tailored to local contexts. Below we've provided some of the evidence-based strategies to address the health
impacts of climate change, and how some CRSCI grantees are successfully implementing them.

For more success stories, explore the American Public Health Association’s “Adaptation in Action: CRSCI Grantee Success
Stories.” 4

Climate Adaptations in Action

Assessing Flooding Vulnerability to Protect Drinking Water in Minnesota

Extreme rainfall events can lead to more flooding. Flood waters can wash contaminants into drinking water sources, which
can be problematic for both public utilities and private well owners, who need to test and treat their water to ensure it is safe.
One in five people in Minnesota draws their water from a private well. Unlike people who obtain their water from a public
utility, private well users are responsible for maintaining their own drinking water quality. Private well users are more likely to
drink contaminated well water caused by flooding because they may not have the knowledge or the resources to test and
treat their drinking water.

In June 2018, the Minnesota Climate & Health Program conducted a vulnerability assessment related to flooding and private
wells. The assessment found 22,000 private wells in floodplains, spurring new collaborations with other programs within the
Minnesota Department of Health. Staff in the Well Management Section prioritized efforts to enhance services and improve
communications for private well users impacted by or preparing for a flood. Staff are working to make test kits for private well
users readily available from local public health departments or Soil Water and Conservation Districts and are working to
improve sample turnaround. The program continues to provide technical assistance to the section, by providing information,
planning assistance, and review. The Well Management Section’s efforts were some of the first deliberate actions to
institutionalize climate change into drinking water programs in Minnesota.

Building Community Resiliency in New York City

Disadvantaged communities can face increased risk for climate-related morbidity. They may not have the necessary
resources, ability, or information to evacuate ahead of a coastal storm, maintain life-sustaining equipment during a power
outage, or stay cool at home during an extreme heat event. Climate interventions promoting connections to neighbors and

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/climate-and-health-adaptation.html



Page 103: 5/11/24, 2:23 PM Climate and Health Adaptation in Action | CDC

community institutions can foster social cohesion, which in turn can enhance community climate resiliency and reduce
associated adverse health outcomes.

Be A Buddy (BAB) is a pilot project launched by the New York City Climate and Health Program in July 2017 to increase local
climate resilience. It aims to strengthen relationships between residents and local organizations to reduce vulnerabilities to
extreme heat and other weather emergencies in four low-income communities in New York City. BAB provides technical
expertise, funding, and access to city resources to three participating community organization partners: Brooklyn Community
Services, the Point Community Development Corporation in the Bronx, and Union Settlement in East Harlem. Starting in May
2018, the organizations received trainings on heat health, emergency preparedness, and volunteer management.

In turn, they delivered 50 trainings on heat safety and climate resiliency to their staff, volunteers, and community members.
The organizations then implemented risk assessment screenings to identify residents at greater risk for heat-related illness
and recruited and trained 64 volunteers to their “Be A Buddy networks” to check on those at-risk residents. In 2018-2019, they
activated 17 times for extreme heat and winter/cold weather events, reaching 454 at-risk residents by phone or in person
during the activations. The organizations solidified the social cohesion of the networks between organizations, volunteers,
and at-risk residents through 114 engagement events during the first 19 months of the pilot. The knowledge gained through
BAB will identify best practices and challenges in increasing connections between local stakeholders to build social cohesion
and climate resiliency and to improve health outcomes.

Promoting Awareness of Heat-Related Illness in Arizona

A total of 2,874 heat-related illness emergency department visits occurred in Arizona in 2017, with most occurring from May
through September. Local media and community organizations often inquire about heat numbers and safety messages
during the summer months. To rapidly address this interest and to promote heat safety behaviors, the Arizona Department of
Health Services (ADHS) Climate and Health Program and Environmental Public Health Tracking Program teamed up with
National Weather Service (NWS) offices in Arizona for an Arizona Heat Awareness Week (May 28 - June 1, 2018). This campaign
used social media messages to help educate and empower Arizona residents about heat-related illness, prevention measures,
and available resources. Embedded links connected people to information on heat illness statistics, heat illness prevention
and treatment, and cooling center locations. NWS developed a 2018 Arizona Heat Awareness Week website in English and
Spanish, with input from the Climate and Health Program, to share during the campaign. The social media campaign reached
more than 437,000 people, and the ADHS Heat Illness website received 6,559 page views during the campaign. Radio and
television media outlets in Arizona publicized the campaign, as did other stakeholders like the Pima County Health
Department and the Maricopa County Department of Public Health.

Learn more: https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/climate_ready.htm
Last Reviewed: September 26, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/climate-and-health-adaptation.html



Page 104: 5/11/24, 2:12 PM Climate and Health Program | CDC
Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Learn more about CDC/ATSDR’s Agency-wide Climate and Health Strategic Framework

CDC's Climate and Health Program

CDC's Climate and Health Program supports state, tribal, local, and territorial public health agencies as they prepare for
the health impacts of a changing climate. CDC is proud of the collaborative work states, cities, territories, and tribes are
doing to develop and implement adaptation plans to protect at-risk populations and locations.

Started in 2010, CDC's Climate-Ready States and Cities Initiative is now helping 13 grant recipients around the nation use
the five-step Building Resilience Against Climate Effects (BRACE) framework to identify likely climate impacts in their
communities, potential health effects associated with these impacts, and their most at-risk populations and locations. The
BRACE framework then helps these jurisdictions develop and implement health adaptation plans and address gaps in
critical public health functions and services. Additionally, the program has created a suite of communication products and
guidance to help our grant recipients better communicate with local communities and partners about these climate and
health impacts.

CDC also funds additional partners through the “Building Capacity of the Public Health System to Improve Population
Health through National, Nonprofit Organizations” program. CDC collaborates with the National Indian Health Board to
directly fund tribes through the Climate-Ready Tribes Program. [4

While the Climate and Health Program is very excited about our accomplishments so far, we are building on this work and

continue to develop new projects and provide more opportunities for our partners around the nation as they protect
their communities from the local health impacts of a changing climate.

Learn about our Climate and Health Science Webinar Series

Related Links

Adaptation in Action: CRSCI Grantee Success Stories 4

The Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States 4

CDC TRAIN

CDC eedine learning xysten

Climate Change and Children’s Health (web-based course) 4

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/default.htm



Page 105: 5/11/24, 2:12 PM Climate and Health Program | CDC

Impact of Climate Change on Human Health

Injuries, fatalities, Asthma,
mental health impacts cardiovascular disease

Air
Pollution

Heat-related illness
and death,
cardiovascular failure

Extreme

Increasing
Allergens Respiratory

. : ; J. ry il - th
civil conflict, \ sania allergies, asthma
‘mental health | a ort :

Building Resistance Against Climate Effects (BRACE)

Climate Impacts
and Assessing
Vulnerabilities

BRACE

uilding Resilience

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/default.htm



Page 106: 5/11/24, 2:12 PM

CDC's Climate-Ready States & Cities Initiative

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/default.htm

Climate and Health Program | CDC

RearKiec gee

3/4



Page 107: 5/11/24, 2:12 PM Climate and Health Program | CDC

Resources for Public Health Professionals

CO© how climate affects community health - full video

+
+

4° *

+ .

HOW.CLIMATE\AFFECTS
COMMUNI: Y HEALTH -

+
* . + *

Heat & Health Tracker

Last Reviewed: November 29, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/default.htm

44



Page 108: 5/11/24, 4:01 PM Climate Change | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

} Centers for Disease
CD Control and Prevention

National Environmental Public Health Tracking

Climate change, together with other natural and human-made health stressors, can affect human health in several direct
and indirect ways. Tracking data may be used to inform decision-making and policies that can help local communities
assess vulnerabilities, estimate the burden, and build overall resilience against the effects of a changing climate.

Climate Change Data

The following datasets can be used to better understand how changes in temperature and precipitation and occurrence of
heat waves, floods, droughts, and wildfires can influence human health. While all communities are vulnerable to health effects
associated with climate change, not everyone is equally at risk. Important considerations include age, economic resources,
and location.

Community Characteristics 4

e Households
This indicator provides information about the housing units within a community. It includes the total number of
housing units, as well as the number and percent of housing units with 10 or more units, more people than rooms,
and no vehicle available. In addition, you can find the number and percent of vacant housing units, renter-occupied
housing, and mobile homes. Also included are data on the number and percent of the population living in group
quarters. Census tract, county, and state level data are available.

e Internet Access
This indicator provides information about internet access. It includes number and percent of people with access to
computer with internet (but no cell phone). It also includes the and number and percent of households with
smartphones, households with a smartphone but no other device, and households with no internet access. In
addition, you can find number and percent of people who have a computer without an internet subscription, with
different age, income, and education options. Census tract, county, and state level data are available.

e Land Cover

This indicator provides census tract, county, and state level data on the percent of land covered by water, percent of
land covered by forest, and percent of developed imperviousness.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ClimateChange.htm

1/16



Page 109: 5/11/24, 4:01 PM Climate Change | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

e Land Use
This indicator provides census tract, county, and state level data on the percent of land used for agriculture and
percent of developed land use. It also provides rural-urban county classifications.

Drought Vv

e Historical Drought
This indicator uses SPEI data to show the number of months of mild or worse drought per year and the maximum
number of consecutive months of mild or worse drought. It uses the USDM data to show the number of weeks of
moderate or worse drought per year and the maximum number of consecutive weeks of moderate or worse drought.
The USDM provides a consistent big-picture look at drought conditions in the United States; it is not recommended for
inferring specifics about the vulnerability of local populations to drought.

Extreme Heat Ww

e Temperature & Heat Projections
This indicator shows modeled county-level data to look at projections of extreme daytime and nighttime temperatures
to better understand how our climate is changing. These data can be used to identify changes in extreme heat over
time and focus preparedness plans to lessen the health effects of extreme heat.

e Historical Temperature & Heat Index
This indicator allows you to look at temperature, heat index, and number of days to define extremely hot days and
extreme heat events using modeled data by county and census tract during May-September of each year.

Heat-related Illness Ww

e Heat-related Emergency Department Visits *
This indicator estimates the number and rate of emergency department visits for heat stress. It includes all cases

where heat stress is listed as a primary or other diagnosis.

e Heat-related Hospitalizations * 4
This indicator estimates the number and rate of hospitalizations for heat stress. It includes all cases where heat stress

is listed as a primary or other diagnosis.

e Heat-related Mortality
This indicator is based on data from death certificates to evaluate deaths that have identified heat as an underlying or

contributing cause.

* These data come from hospital records and may not capture the full range of heat-related illness if exposure to excess heat is not explicitly documented. These data can be used to
document changes over place and time, monitor vulnerable areas, and evaluate the results of local climate-adaptation strategies. | These data are supplied by health departments funded

by the CDC Tracking Program.

Population Characteristics Vv

e Demographics
This indicator includes population estimates (number and percent) of people by race, ethnicity, age, gender, single-
parent households, speaking English less than “very well’, and aged 65 years and older and living alone. Data are
presented at Census tract, county, and/or state level for all states.

e Health Status
This indicator includes data on number and percent of people uninsured; number and percent of people over 5 years

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ClimateChange.htm



Page 110: 5/11/24, 4:01 PM Climate Change | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

of age with a disability; and percent of population diagnosed with diabetes. Data are presented at Census tract,
county, and/or state level for all states.

¢ Socioeconomic Status
This indicator includes data on poverty, household income, employment status, and high school (or equivalent)
graduation status. Data are presented at Census tract, county, and/or state level for all states.

Precipitation & Flooding Vv

e Historical Precipitation
This indicator provides the number of extreme precipitation days and the monthly estimates of precipitation by
county and census tract for every state except Alaska and Hawaii.

¢ Precipitation & Flooding Projections
This indicator shows modeled precipitation data on projected extreme precipitation days and projected maximum
precipitation during an extreme event. The projected data result from comparing projected values for different time
periods (early 21st century, mid-21st century, and late 21st century) to historical data from 1976-2005. Data are
available nationwide at the county level.

Vulnerabilities & Preparedness Vv

e Vulnerability & Preparedness: Precipitation & Flooding
This indicator provides county-level estimates on the total area and percentage of total areas within a flood hazard
zone, as well as the number of residents and housing units per county in a 100-year flood zone. The data use flood
hazard risk areas defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency [4 (FEMA) and the Environmental
Protection Agency [4 (EPA).

e Heat Vulnerability & Preparedness
This indicator provides information about the factors that put individuals at greater risk of heat-related health effects.
These measures are diabetes, heart disease, poverty, race, advanced age, social isolation, disabilities, population
density, forest canopy, developed land use, and cultivated crop land use.

e Medical Infrastructure
This indicator provides county-level data on the numbers of hospitals, numbers of hospital beds, percentage of
hospitals located within a flood hazard area, and percentage of hospital beds located within a flood hazard area.
These data can be used to identify community vulnerabilities, plan resource needs, and inform disaster preparedness
efforts.

¢ Social Vulnerability Index
This indicator shows relative vulnerability of every U.S. Census tract on 14 social factors including poverty, lack of
vehicle access, and crowded housing. The factors are grouped into four related themes. Each Census tract receives a
ranking for each variable, each theme, and an overall ranking. These data can be used by public health officials and
local planners to better prepare communities to respond to emergency events like severe weather, floods, disease
outbreaks, or chemical exposure. Depending on the year, data are available at the Census tract and county level for all
states.

Wildfires WZ

e Wildfires
This indicator displays locations of predicted surface smoke concentrations from wildfires that are layered on top of
county- and census tract-level measures of access to care and social vulnerability, health status, annual air quality
levels, or population characteristics

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ClimateChange.htm



Page 111: 5/11/24, 4:01 PM

Data Highlight

a

Cimate
Meath
Progra

Oecete ets
TRACKING

Climate Change | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Heat & Health Tracker

Damas mage aaa) OS ei Lonely NG el AGP: od Fag. at Speeela WE Had.” Babel Mina Mingling
Sagg Tea (et ret fp epee pcr pee

ee

Pi

BE 2 a ee a ee a eT gee ee
ee BR es ee eee ee eee, ae
Sat eier ta patil a a Se a ed ee

ares
Pe . |: Pe Fen

as Fr

Tracking partnered with CDC's Climate & Health Program to develop the Heat and Health Tracker. This interactive data
dashboard puts local heat information into the hands of decision makers, media, and the public for every county in the
United States! See how extreme heat affects your county today.

Climate Change Resources

e Climate and Health Program

View information, recommendations, and resources on climate change, how it affects human health, and building
resilience against its effects

e Heat and Health Tracker
Explore how extreme heat affects your county, populations that are at risk, and resources for response.

Explore Climate Change Data

Data Explorer

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ClimateChange.htm



Page 112: 5/11/24, 4:01 PM Climate Change | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

x

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

Carter] fe 6 eee

Ce ee Bee! ie eee eo ee ed ee

dere Peer oe cee =| Per ol ee ee eee ee. ee ed ed

dade: Parsi ee Aci Pcs ol ciety. ee Cie eee ae i er ere be ee 0 ed

fale ee oe oe ey Gadel Peed ol el ee ey eed oe ee ee NN es do oa rt ] i 0

ja es ere ee | Pe ce ee ae eT: Wee: a Ss pre La! cd ela ie

dre Payers Srey es Pare cl acta. ges ee eee ae i ed =, me. edt oe
ee Pee es Pgs oe eee ee ie ew ee ee te]
AASB Peele ces U5 pe ee ee ee eS oy ee ee

daeg Oey pee eres ters ae a a eb eg ae ee ee ae

die Porters aoe ie | Perel aches wi aie ene wil oom eee coulis ctor oe oe ee mood aa C0 wre

et ee ee eg ee ee ri i a
Lika

ee eee ee Pod 2 ee ee ee) ee ee) ee eee

View data in simple charts

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ClimateChange.htm



Page 113: 5/11/24, 4:01 PM

API

Climate Change | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ClimateChange.htm

6/6



Page 114: 5/11/24, 2:14 PM Climate Change and Public Health - Health Effects - Pollen and Your Health | CDC

J Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Ragweed is one of the highest pollen polluters. One plant can produce a billion grains of pollen each season. Ragweed is
the primary contributor to fall season allergies.

What is pollen?

Pollen is the grains or tiny seeds of flowering plants, trees, and grasses. These seeds can be carried on the wind and can cause
various symptoms, or none at all, in individuals who are exposed to them.

What health problems can pollen cause?

For people with hay fever, also known as “allergic rhinitis,” breathing in pollen can cause sneezing, congestion, and a runny
nose. Pollen exposure can also result in “allergic conjunctivitis” in some individuals, causing red, watery, or itchy eyes.

Pollen exposure can also cause asthma attacks in people who have asthma and for whom pollen is an asthma trigger.

How can | protect myself against pollen?

If you are allergic to pollen, or if you have asthma you can take steps to protect yourself:

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/pollen-health.htm

1/2



Page 115: 5/11/24, 2:14 PM Climate Change and Public Health - Health Effects - Pollen and Your Health | CDC

Check pollen forecasts on local news and online sources and plan to spend less time outdoors when pollen levels will be
high.
Take your allergy and/or asthma medications as prescribed by your health care provider.

Don't touch your eyes while you are outside, and wash your hands when you go back inside (before you touch your
eyes).

Shower after being outside to remove pollen from your skin and hair.
Change your clothes after being outdoors.
Keep windows closed during pollen season.

Use high-efficiency filters in your home's heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) system. Make sure your HVAC
system can use high-efficiency filters and that they don't violate the system's warranty.

How is climate change affecting pollen levels?

Our changing climate has caused shifts in precipitation patterns, more frost-free days, warmer seasonal air temperatures, and

more carbon dioxide (CO) in the atmosphere. These changes can affect:

when the pollen season starts and ends and how long it lasts each year,
how much pollen plants create and how much is in the air, and

how pollen affects human health.

Some of these changes in pollen due to climate change could have major impacts on human health such as increasing

individuals’ exposure to pollen and their risk of having allergy and/or asthma symptoms.
Page last reviewed: August 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/pollen-health.htm

2/2



Page 116: 5/11/24, 2:24 PM

ee

ss

CDC leads efforts to anticipate the health effects of climate change, to ensure that systems are in place to detect and track
them, and to take steps to prepare for, respond to, and manage associated risks.

Climate Change and Public Health - Policy | CDC

Download PDF Version of CDC Policy on Climate and Health BB [PDF - 35 KB]

Scientific Framework

Widespread scientific consensus exists that the world’s climate is changing. Some of the effects are likely to include more
variable weather, heat waves, heavy precipitation events, flooding, droughts, more intense storms such as hurricanes, sea
level rise, and air pollution. Each of these changes has the potential to negatively affect health. While climate change is
recognized as a global issue, the effects will vary across geographic regions and populations.

Although scientific understanding of the effects of climate change is still emerging, there is a pressing need to prepare for
potential health risks. This public health preparedness approach is applied to other threats in the absence of complete data,
such as terrorism and pandemic influenza. A wide variety of organizations (federal, state, local, multilateral, private and
nongovernmental) are addressing the implications of climate change globally. Despite this breadth of activity, the public
health effects of climate change remain largely unaddressed.

Climate change has the potential to impact health in many ways. While some of these are unpredictable, others (shown in the
table) are supported by considerable evidence.

Weather Event

Heat waves

Extreme weather events,(rain, hurricane,
tornado, flooding)

Droughts, floods, increased mean
temperature

Sea-level rise

Drought, ecosystem migration

Extreme weather events, drought

Increases in ground-level ozone,
airborne allergens, and other pollutants

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/policy.htm

Health Effects

Heat stress

Injuries, drowning

Vector - food - and water-borne diseases

Injuries, drowning, water and soil salinization,
ecosystem and economic disruption

Food and water shortages, malnutrition

Mass population movement, international
conflict

Respiratory disease exacerbations (COPD,
asthma, allergic rhinitis, bronchitis)

Populations Most Affected

Extremes of age, athletes, people
with respiratory disease

Coastal, low-lying land dwellers,
low SES

Multiple populations at risk

Coastal, low SES

Low SES, elderly, children

General population

Elderly, children, those with
respiratory disease

1/2



Page 117: 5/11/24, 2:24 PM Climate Change and Public Health - Policy | CDC

Climate change generally; extreme Mental health Young, displaced, agricultural
events sector, low SES

Priority Actions for Climate and Health

Building on existing programs and the Essential Public Health Services, CDC has identified the following priority health actions
for climate change:

1. Serve as a credible source of information on the health consequences of climate change for the U.S. population and
globally.

. Track data on environmental conditions, disease risks, and disease occurrence related to climate change.
. Expand capacity for modeling and forecasting health effects that may be climate-related.
. Enhance the science base to better understand the relationship between climate change and health outcomes.

. Identify locations and population groups at greatest risk for specific health threats, such as heat waves.

n UU KR WN

. Communicate the health-related aspects of climate change, including risks and ways to reduce them, to the public,
decision makers, and healthcare providers.

7. Develop partnerships with other government agencies, the private sector, nongovernmental organizations, universities,
and international organizations to more effectively address U.S. and global health aspects of climate change.

8. Provide leadership to state and local governments, community leaders, healthcare professionals, nongovernmental
organizations, the faith-based communities, the private sector and the public, domestically and internationally, regarding
health protection from the effects of climate change.

9. Develop and implement preparedness and response plans for health threats such as heat waves, severe weather events,
and infectious diseases.

10. Provide technical advice and support to state and local health departments, the private sector, and others in
implementing national and global preparedness measures related to the health effects of climate change.

11. Promote workforce development by helping to ensure the training of a new generation of competent, experienced public
health staff to respond to the health threats posed by climate change.
Page last reviewed: September 9, 2019

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/policy.htm

2/2



Page 118: 5/11/24, 4:02 PM Community Characteristics | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

za Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

We Track That

Understanding the characteristics of a community is essential for all kinds of public health practices such as program planning
and epidemiologic studies. Community characteristics are particularly important in public health emergency preparedness.

A key step in preparedness planning for any disaster, whether it be radiological, chemical, or natural, is identifying a
community's

¢ most likely hazards
¢ most vulnerable populations
e available resources, and

e ability to respond.

Knowledge of the local infrastructure, vulnerabilities, and resources enables public health professionals to quickly establish
priorities and take proper actions during the emergency or disaster response.

Types of Data

The Tracking Network uses several national data sources to obtain state and local data about community characteristics.
Sources include the Federal Emergency Management Agency [4, the American Hospital Association 4, and the U.S. Census
Bureau's [4 American Community Survey.

Flood Vulnerability

This indicator provides county level data on the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) designated Special Flood
Hazard Area including number of square miles within the area, the number of people living in the area, and the number
of housing units within the area. These data can be used to estimate the number of people and housing units at risk from
flooding.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/CommunityCharacteristics.htm#print

115



Page 119: 5/11/24, 4:02 PM Community Characteristics | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Households

This indicator provides information about the housing units within a community. It includes the total number of housing
units, as well as the number and percent of housing units with 10 or more units, more people than rooms, and no vehicle
available. In addition, you can find the number and percent of vacant housing units, renter-occupied housing, and mobile
homes. Also included are data on the number and percent of the population living in group quarters. Census tract,
county, and state level data are available.

Internet Access

This indicator provides information about internet access. It includes number and percent of people with access to
computer with internet (but no cell phone). It also includes the and number and percent of households with
smartphones, households with a smartphone but no other device, and households with no internet access. In addition,
you can find number and percent of people who have a computer without an internet subscription, with different age,
income, and education options. Census tract, county, and state level data are available.

Land Cover
This indicator provides census tract, county, and state level data on the percent of land covered by water, percent of land
covered by forest, and percent of developed imperviousness.

Land Use
This indicator provides census tract, county, and state level data on the percent of land used for agriculture and percent
of developed land use. It also provides rural-urban county classifications.

Medical Infrastructure

This indicator provides county-level data on the numbers of hospitals, numbers of hospital beds, percentage of hospitals
located within a flood hazard area, and percentage of hospital beds located within a flood hazard area. These data can be
used to identify community vulnerabilities, plan resource needs, and inform disaster preparedness efforts.

Vegetation
This indicator provides an estimate for the amount of vegetation (all plant life) in a census tract. Data are available for all
50 states, plus the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico.

Data Highlight

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/CommunityCharacteristics.htm#print



Page 120: 5/11/24, 4:02 PM Community Characteristics | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

A

ee As Fe ES | PL a | eee Ae) ee ee

=

eo
ee me ig
Fi

LEGEND

1a. wh.

ae SL

Add layers to any map.

Click on the gear icon to select layers: surface smoke, current radar, transportation noise, active Atlantic cyclones. Try it!

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/CommunityCharacteristics.htm#print

3/5



Page 121: 5/11/24, 4:02 PM Community Characteristics | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Data in Action

Public health professionals can use the Tracking Network's community characteristics data to

e identify households or geographies likely to be affected by a public health emergency.
e determine the amount of available resources within a community.

e calculate the amount of resources needed for a public health response or for public safety.

Learn More

e Emergency Preparedness and Response

¢ Geospatial Research, Analysis, and Services Program (GRASP)

e Health Studies Branch

¢ Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response

e Planning for an Emergency: Strategies for Identifying and Engaging At-Risk Groups 8

e Public Health Emergency Response Guide for State, Local, and Tribal Public Health Directors, version 2.0

Related Content Areas
¢ Community characteristics data can be used with Tracking Network data on Populations and Vulnerabilities to plan
effective public health responses to public health emergencies.

Explore Community Characteristics Data

Data Explorer

a. a ey

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/CommunityCharacteristics.htm#print

45



Page 122: 5/11/24, 4:02 PM Community Characteristics | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Corton fevge © dal ere

renee fog BH

aR men Pein om ng Be Pte et pee ge er ey ed Ea

dere rye seg eee | Pa od ce ee ee ee. rd ed ed!

dade Popesieres ary Ble | Perce col acieiy pee chee eed eit andres. wo ert Serco bee ne aed a |
Pa Pie Bl Pe ee hel ee de ed ee ee es eee ee ee ee ee ee ed ee
Berek: Peeve ra | Pairk eb A eS a 9! Wd oh
ee ee Bo ee Be al

Paar ak: Peri a ea Re, ame od eee) ieee i (Dad ea ae

dave Payee ere eee | red cd ca ee ed nr LS ad
fata"

dai Peters ere ees Peel aches i ee ee oe ee ee rerio 9 ead or es ed em acl

cme
PAST ied: Persie nhs a ies oe Peek ee i et Pome to
Cakes
dare. Pa ee es Par ot on ae ee ee
Cnicey

View data in simple tables

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/CommunityCharacteristics.htm#print



Page 123: 5/11/24, 4:02 PM Community Design | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

CDC Centers for Disease —
2° Control and Prevention

Home

Community Design

We Track That

The Tracking Network contains information about community design elements that are related to some of the leading causes
of death and disability in the United States, such as injuries, heart disease, diabetes, and asthma.

Types of Data

The health and safety of a community are influenced by many factors. Tracking these data can serve as a benchmark to
demonstrate the impact that changes in community design elements can have on activity levels, time spent outdoors, obesity
rates, and chronic diseases.

Access to Parks and Schools* 4 (2)
This data estimates the number or percentage of people living within a half mile of a park or a public school.

Proximity of Populations to Schools and Highways +°)
This indicator displays the number and percent of public schools located within 150m of a highway. It also displays the
number of people and percentage of a population living withing 150m of a highway.

Footnotes:

1. (*) These data are supplied by the National Center for Educational Statistics. Additional Data supplied by Navteq, 2010, Quarter 3, “LANDUSEA” layer for parks.

2. ({) These data are supplied by the U.S. Census (2020).

3. (+) These data are supplied by Geospatial Research, Analysis and Services Program (GRASP); Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease

Registry (CDC/ATSDR).

Data Highlight

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/CommunityDesign.htm

114



Page 124: 5/11/24, 4:02 PM Community Design | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

| E A wl &

es PS ES | Pe a | ee ee) ee a

Add layers to any map.
Click on the gear icon to select layers: surface smoke, current radar, transportation noise, active Atlantic cyclones. Try it!

Data in Action

These data can be used to

e serve as a benchmark to demonstrate the impact that changes in the location of parks and schools can have on activity
levels, time spent outdoors, obesity rates, and chronic diseases.

e question is there any linkage between proximity to highway and health outcomes?

e identify communities that have more walking, bicycling, and public transportation trips.
Read these success stories to learn about the community design related work happening in our funded Tracking Programs.

California |Oregon

Learn More

e Healthy Places
e Motor Vehicle Safety

¢ Transportation Policy Recommendations

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/CommunityDesign.htm 2/4



Page 125: 5/11/24, 4:02 PM Community Design | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Explore Community Design Data

Data Explorer

x

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/CommunityDesign.htm

3/4



Page 126: 5/11/24, 4:02 PM

Gorter fee 6 dal eee
ree
cd eile ee cs Bb

Cas

Cnicey

Community Design | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

mam TH

Pep mee an pees ape ead eee a a

Rater of ec ee ee ee eee. eed oe!

Pace col acheter ier edo. ic eee Sere be ne Bae) ee |
Per ee el ee ee ed eS a ees eee eee ee ee eT ad
Peco cd Mech ea eSB AH ee a ed Tn +

fe OE We Bo ee Be Dl

emcee RL eM cm a Ey A Rd rl AD ad wt +

Prard cf ca a ee i ee)
aT”

Pec aches. i ei ee oe ee oie Ook cel or. en eed ev 1! arc
oe

Wier hcl i in hPa ded el sa LT ri

Par ot on ae ee ee

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Last Reviewed: December 8, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/CommunityDesign.htm

44



Page 127: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Developmental Disabilities | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

CD zai Centers for Disease
> Control and Prevention

National Environmental Public Health Tracking

Developmental Disabilities

Le

In the United States, about 1 in 6 children have a developmental disability. Developmental disabilities are a diverse group
of severe chronic conditions that are due to mental and/or physical impairments. The specific cause of most
developmental disabilities is unknown, and may result from an interaction between genetic, environmental, and social

£ +

factors.

We Track That

The Tracking Network has data for seven developmental disabilities. Although causes of specific developmental disabilities are
often not known, these disabilities were chosen because some scientific evidence suggests environmental exposures may
play a role in developing these conditions.

The Tracking Network has data on the following developmental disabilities:

e Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs)
¢ Developmental delay

e Emotional disturbance

e Hearing impairment or hearing loss
e Intellectual disabilities

e Speech or language impairment

e Specific learning disability

Types of Data

The Tracking Network has data for two developmental disability indicators:

e Children receiving interventions or services

e Estimated prevalence of autism

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/DevelopmentalDisabilities.htm



Page 128: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Developmental Disabilities | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

The developmental disabilities data are provided by two sources the U.S. Department of Education and CDC's Autism and

Developmental Disability Monitoring Network. Data are available at the state level for different age groups. Not all states
or years are represented in the data.

Data Highlight

| 20 eae

a A Fe ES | PL ee | eee oe ee) ee a

Add layers to any map.
Click on the gear icon to select layers: surface smoke, current radar, transportation noise, active Atlantic cyclones. Try it!

Learn More

e Autism Spectrum Disorder

e Developmental Disabilities

e Hearing Loss in Children

e Intellectual Disabilities

e Language and Speech Disorders in Children

e Learning Disorders in Children

Tracking Resources
e Resources for Maternal and Child Health Professionals

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/DevelopmentalDisabilities.htm 2/4



Page 129: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM

Developmental Disabilities | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Related Content Areas
e Reproductive and Birth Outcomes

e Childhood Lead Poisoning
e Birth Defects

Explore Developmental Disabilities Data

Data Explorer

a a

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/DevelopmentalDisabilities.htm

3/4



Page 130: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Developmental Disabilities | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Corton fevge © dal ere

renee fog BH

aR men Pein om ng Be Pte et pee ge er ey ed Ea

dere rye seg eee | Pa od ce ee ee ee. rd ed ed!

dade Popesieres ary Ble | Perce col acieiy pee chee eed eit andres. wo ert Serco bee ne aed a |
Pa Pie Bl Pe ee hel ee de ed ee ee es eee ee ee ee ee ee ed ee
Berek: Peeve ra | Pairk eb A eS a 9! Wd oh
ee ee Bo ee Be al

Paar ak: Peri a ea Re, ame od eee) ieee i (Dad ea ae

dave Payee ere eee | red cd ca ee ed nr LS ad
fata"

dai Peters ere ees Peel aches i ee ee oe ee ee rerio 9 ead or es ed em acl

cme
PAST ied: Persie nhs a ies oe Peek ee i et Pome to
Cakes
dare. Pa ee es Par ot on ae ee ee
Cnicey

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/DevelopmentalDisabilities.htm



Page 131: 5/11/24, 2:14 PM Diseases Carried by Vectors | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Climate and Health Home

Diseases Carried by Vectors

Climate is one of the factors that influence the distribution of diseases borne by vectors (such as fleas, ticks, and mosquitoes,
which spread pathogens that cause illness). The geographic and seasonal distribution of vector populations, and the diseases
they can carry, depends not only on climate but also on land use, socioeconomic and cultural factors, pest control, access to
health care, and human responses to disease risk, among other factors. Daily, seasonal, or year-to-year climate variability can
sometimes result in vector/pathogen adaptation and shifts or expansions in their geographic ranges. Such shifts can alter
disease incidence depending on vector-host interaction, host immunity, and pathogen evolution. North Americans are
currently at risk from numerous vector-borne diseases, including Lyme, dengue fever, West Nile virus disease, Rocky
Mountain spotted fever, plague, and tularemia. Vector-borne pathogens not currently found in the United States, such as
chikungunya, Chagas disease, and Rift Valley fever viruses, are also threats.

A changing climate’s impact on the geographical distribution and incidence of vector-borne diseases in other countries where
these diseases are already found can also impact North Americans, especially as a result of increasing trade with, and travel
to, tropical and subtropical areas. Whether a changing climate in the U.S. will increase the chances of domestically acquiring
diseases such as dengue fever is uncertain due to vector-control efforts and lifestyle factors, such as time spent indoors, that
reduce human-insect contact.

Infectious disease transmission is sensitive to local, small-scale differences in weather, human modification of the landscape,
the diversity of animal hosts, and human behavior that affects vector-human contact, among other factors. Finer-scale, long-
term studies are needed to help quantify the relationships among weather variables, vector range, and vector-borne
pathogen occurrence; the consequences of shifting distributions of vectors and pathogens; and the impacts on human
behavior. Enhanced vector surveillance and human disease tracking are needed to address these concerns.

Watch a short video about disease vectors, and how communities can defend against them.

CDC Vector-Borne Disease Resources:

e Ticks - information on preventing bites, removing ticks, tickborne diseases, and symptoms
e¢ Mosquitoes - information on preventing bites and mosquito-borne viruses
e Vector-Borne Disease (DVBD) - resources and guidance from the Division of Vector-Borne Disease

¢ Climate Change Increases the Risk of Vector-Borne Diseases 9 [PDF - 111 KB]
Last Reviewed: December 21, 2020

https://www.cdce.gov/climateandhealth/effects/vectors.htm

11



Page 132: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Drinking Water | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Home

Drinking Water

We Track That

The Tracking Network has data and information about the levels of several contaminants that can be found in drinking water.
These contaminants were selected for the Tracking Network because they occur more frequently in drinking water at levels
that may be of public health significance.

The drinking water data used in the Tracking Network are gathered as part of the water quality monitoring requirements [4
set out by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and state agencies. Tracking Network data are the only set of
consistent drinking water quality data nationwide. While they are not gathered specifically to assess the level of exposure or
to track changes in water quality over time, they can be used to determine the potential for public health impacts from
contaminant levels of concern.

The main issues considered in the development of the contaminant-specific measures presented on the Tracking Network
included the following:

e Exposure patterns
e Monitoring requirements/sampling frequency
e Censored values

e Drinking water quality standards/Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs)

Types of Data

The indicators for drinking water describe public water use and the levels of various contaminants in public water supplies.
These data indicate the potential for public health effects from contaminant levels of concern.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/drinkingwater.htm



Page 133: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Drinking Water | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Public Water Use

This indicator shows the number of community water systems per state and the number of people receiving water from
those community water systems. The data is gathered from state grant recipients and can be used to estimate the
population potentially exposed to contaminants in community water systems.

Drinking Water Contaminants
Data for these measures come from state grant recipients. For each contaminant, you can determine the following:

¢ Distribution of level of contaminant in finished drinking water
These data show the number of community water systems and their concentrations of contaminants. You can use
these data to see how well the community water systems are producing high-quality water.

e Potential for exposure to the contaminant in finished drinking water
These data show estimates of the number of people served by community water systems along with the
concentration of contaminants. You can use these data to determine the potential for a population’s exposure to
contaminants in community drinking water

e Level of contaminant in finished drinking water
These data show quarterly and yearly average concentrations of a contaminant in finished drinking water. You can use
these data to estimate potential long-term exposure to contaminants in drinking water.

Unregulated Drinking Water Contaminants

These measures provide information to the public on the water systems where PFAS chemicals and perchlorate were
detected, and where the two chemicals with the EPA health advisory (PFOA and PFOS) were found in exceedance of that
level. The measures also provide information on the water systems where samples were taken and no chemicals were
detected.

Perchlorate can disrupt the normal function of the thyroid gland in both children and adults. The maximum contaminant
level for perchlorate is 56 ug/L.

Regulated Drinking Water Contaminants on the Tracking Network

e Arsenic

e Atrazine

e Di(2-ethylhexyl) Phthalate (DEHP)
¢ Disinfection By-products (DBP)

e Nitrate

e Tetrachloroethylene

e Radium

e Trichloroethylene

e Uranium
Unregulated Drinking Water Contaminants on the Tracking Network

e Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS)

e Perchlorate

Data Highlight

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/drinkingwater.htm

2/4



Page 134: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Drinking Water | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

.: ee ee 2 ee ee

View point-level community water system data using Tracking Network's data explorer tool.

Data in Action

Making sure that drinking water remains in compliance with recommended standards is the most important way to prevent
health problems caused by contaminants in drinking water. Protecting water sources, providing effective and reliable water
treatment, and monitoring water quality are the main strategies for providing high-quality drinking water.

Read these success stories to learn about the drinking water related work happening in our funded Tracking Programs.

California | lowa | New Mexico | Vermont | Wisconsin

Learn More

e Drinking Water Advisory Communication Toolbox

Healthy Drinking Water
e Private Water Systems
e Toxic Substances Portal

e EPA Drinking Water Program [4

Explore Drinking Water Data

Data Explorer

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/drinkingwater.htm

3/4



Page 135: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Drinking Water | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

a a Pe a re ar ay ere a
maa a i es i

Quick Reports

rere mm

Pare: Pcie om ieee ing | Pe rea ape oe ee ee a

Aerres Pye ese eee | Pe od ce ee eee ed ee. eed ed

date Peres eee ie: Pc cd aise eee oe ee ee eo Bed ej
fal Pee ce Ble ee de ee lg ee ee el ee dey eee ey ee ee ee a ee
Ce Bt ge em Re ee RE ge Boe

dare Payee eerie | Pe cl aes, a i es ee =, em | ed es

BS Bee oe oe Bis. ene ee dele ol ee ee ee os oe ee ee ee ed

API

REQUEST

PI

ATA

Last Reviewed: October 2!

Access machine-readable data

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/drinkingwater.htm



Page 136: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Drought | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

CD Centers for Disease
y Control and Prevention

National Environmental Public Health Tracking

Drought

Data on drought duration and severity in the United States can be used to better understand the connection between
drought, other environmental conditions, and health effects. Although many factors influence how drought will affect a
community, drought trend data and other related indicators can be used to prepare for and prevent potential health
risks.

We Track That

The Tracking Network includes data on drought duration and severity from the United States Drought Monitor [4 (USDM) and
the Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index [4 (SPEI) to track drought trends in the United States. Although many
factors influence how drought will affect a community, drought trend data and other related indicators can be used to
prepare for and prevent potential health risks.

Types of Data

The drought measures on the Tracking Network can be used to examine local, state, regional, and national trends in drought
at the county level. Looking at trends can help us learn more about the relationship between drought-related environmental
exposures and health outcomes, and is important for community planning purposes, allocating drought relief, and for other
drought discussions.

Historical Drought

The Tracking Network provides historical drought data from both the SPEI and the USDM. The SPEI and USDM drought
measures are calculated using different methodologies, and both can be used to monitor trends over time.

Counties Currently Experiencing Drought: Data is reported weekly and reflects whether 50% or more of a county was
in moderate drought or greater for the latest week.

Maximum Number of Consecutive Weeks a County was in Drought by Year: SPEI data is available by year from 1980-

present; and USDM data is available by year from 2000-present. For both the SPEI and USDM methodologies, the data
can be stratified by categorial drought severity or cumulative drought severity.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Drought.htm



Page 137: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Drought | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Total Number of Weeks a County Was in Drought (Cumulative): SPEI data is available from 1980-present; and USDM
data is available from 2000-present. The values are a cumulative total of weeks a county was in drought for the entire
period of record. For both the SPEI and USDM methodologies, the data can be stratified by categorial drought severity or
cumulative drought severity.

Total Number of Weeks a County Was in Drought by Year: SPEI data is available by year from 1980-present; and

USDM data is available by year from 2000-present. For both the SPEI and USDM methodologies, the data can be stratified
by categorial drought severity or cumulative drought severity.

Data Highlight

Add layers to any map.
Click on the gear icon to select layers: surface smoke, current radar, transportation noise, active Atlantic cyclones. Try it!

Data in Action

Understanding drought trends is important for public health professionals, water and sanitation officials, and policy makers
for community planning purposes, allocating drought relief, and for other drought discussions.

Learn More

e Drought and Health

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Drought.htm

2/4



Page 138: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Drought | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

e When Every Drop Counts: Protecting Public Health During Drought Conditions. A Guide for Public Health Professionals
¢ Dought.gov - National Integrated Drought Information System [4
e EPA - WaterSense [4

¢ National Drought Mitigation Center 4

Related Content Areas
e Asthma

e Climate Change
e Heat Stress Illness

e Wildfires

Explore Drought Data

Data Explorer

a. a ey

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Drought.htm

3/4



Page 139: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Drought | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Corton fevge © dal ere

renee fog BH

aR men Pein om ng Be Pte et pee ge er ey ed Ea

dere rye seg eee | Pa od ce ee ee ee. rd ed ed!

dade Popesieres ary Ble | Perce col acieiy pee chee eed eit andres. wo ert Serco bee ne aed a |
Pa Pie Bl Pe ee hel ee de ed ee ee es eee ee ee ee ee ee ed ee
Berek: Peeve ra | Pairk eb A eS a 9! Wd oh
ee ee Bo ee Be al

Paar ak: Peri a ea Re, ame od eee) ieee i (Dad ea ae

dave Payee ere eee | red cd ca ee ed nr LS ad
fata"

dai Peters ere ees Peel aches i ee ee oe ee ee rerio 9 ead or es ed em acl

cme
PAST ied: Persie nhs a ies oe Peek ee i et Pome to
Cakes
dare. Pa ee es Par ot on ae ee ee
Cnicey

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Drought.htm



Page 140: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Environmental Justice | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

CDC Centers for Disease —
betes Control and Prevention

Home

Environmental Justice

We Track That

The Environmental Public Health Tracking Network gathers data and information that are needed to make decisions about
our environment and our health, including personal, community, regulatory, and public health decisions. The Tracking
Network allows users to identify demographic factors, environmental burdens, socioeconomic conditions, and public
health concerns directly related to environmental justice.

Using Tracking Network data,

e Scientists are better able to assess the connections between the environment and its effect on health.

e Public health professionals can easily assess unusual trends and events to determine which communities may be at
risk,

e Elected officials can make more informed policy decisions.

e Everyone can learn more about how the environment may affect their health.

Types of Data

The Tracking Network presents environmental health data in customizable maps, charts, and tables. Users can add layers to
maps, including real-time data (current radar, surface smoke, active Atlantic cyclones, and transportation noise) and points of
interest such as day care centers, landfills, parks, power plants, public schools, and runways.

Air Quality (Outdoor) St

Ozone Days Above Regulatory Standard (Monitor + Modeled) (Monitor only)
The number of days in which the daily maximum 8-hour average ozone concentration exceeds a standard provides an
indication of short-term spikes in ozone concentrations. This may give you an idea of how many days per year you may be

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/EnvironmentalJustice.htm 1/8



Page 141: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Environmental Justice | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

exposed to unhealthy levels of ozone.

PM,,- Days Above Regulatory Standard (Monitor + Modeled)(Monitor only)
These data help summarize short-term trends in particle pollution concentrations. This may give you an idea of how
many days per year you may be exposed to unhealthy levels of particulate matter.

Annual PM25- Level (Monitor + Modeled)(Monitor only)
These data help summarize long-term trends in particle pollution concentrations. This will give you an idea of what the
yearly level of PM2.5is in an area.

Air Toxics
Data from EPA's National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment (NATA [4 ) are used to develop the air toxics indicators for the
Tracking Network. Air toxics measures can be used to

e prioritize emission sources as potential targets for risk reduction activities and further study,
e identify locations of interest for further investigation, and

e show the geographic distribution of air toxics.

Click to view air quality data.

Asthma VY

Asthma Prevalence among Children
Prevalence estimates are organized by different variables to estimate the number of people with asthma in different time
periods and geographic areas, such as states and counties.

Emergency Department Visits for Asthma

This indicator estimates the number and rate of emergency department visits for asthma. These data can be used to
identify trends and patterns of emergency department visits over time and in different geographic areas, such as states
and counties.

Hospitalizations for Asthma
This indicator can be used to identify trends and patterns in the occurrence of asthma hospitalizations across time and

space

Click to view asthma data.

Cancer WV

Cancer Incidence

Incidence is the number of new cases of illness occurring within a specific population over a period of time. For some
cancers, the data can also be aggregated over five years. Data are available for most states, depending on the type of
cancer and the year. Some cancer types have data at the county level. Under advanced options, cancer data can be
further refined by sex and race/ethnicity.

Click to view cancer data.

Childhood Lead Poisoning Vv

Age of Housing
This indicator uses census data to provide information about the number of homes built before 1950 and homes built
from 1950-1979. Living in an older home is one risk factor that can contribute to higher blood lead levels in children.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/EnvironmentalJustice.htm



Page 142: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Environmental Justice | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Census data do not account for the number of older houses that have been renovated or have had lead removed; and
this indicator does not consider other sources of lead in the community.

Click to view childhood lead poisoning data.

Climate Change WZ

The climate change datasets can be used to better understand how changes in temperature and precipitation and
occurrence of heat waves, floods, droughts, and wildfires can influence human health.

Community Characteristics sg?

Households

This indicator provides information about the housing units within a community. It includes the total number of housing
units, as well as the number and percent of housing units with 10 or more units, more people than rooms, and no vehicle
available. In addition, you can find the number and percent of vacant housing units, renter-occupied housing, and mobile
homes. Also included are data on the number and percent of the population living in group quarters. Census tract,
county, and state level data are available.

Internet Access

This indicator provides information about internet access. It includes number and percent of people with access to
computer with internet (but no cell phone). It also includes the and number and percent of households with
smartphones, households with a smartphone but no other device, and households with no internet access. In addition,
you can find number and percent of people who have a computer without an internet subscription, with different age,
income, and education options. Census tract, county, and state level data are available.

Medical Infrastructure
This indicator provides county-level data on the numbers of hospitals, numbers of hospital beds, percentage of hospitals
located within a flood hazard area, and percentage of hospital beds located within a flood hazard area. These data can be

used to identify community vulnerabilities, plan resource needs, and inform disaster preparedness efforts.

Click to view community characteristics data.

Community Design Vv

Access to Parks and Schools
This data estimates the number or percentage of people living within a half mile of a park or a public school.

Proximity of Populations to Schools and Highways
This indicator displays the number and percent of public schools located within 150m of a highway. It also displays the

number of people and percentage of a population living withing 150m of a highway.

Click to view community design data.

Drinking Water Vv

Regulated Drinking Water Contaminants
This indicator shows the distribution of level of contaminant in finished drinking water, Potential for exposure to the
contaminant in finished drinking water, and the Level of contaminant in finished drinking water.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/EnvironmentalJustice.htm 3/8



Page 143: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Environmental Justice | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Unregulated Drinking Water Contaminants

This indicator provides information on the water systems where PFAS chemicals and perchlorate were detected, and
where the two chemicals with the EPA health advisory (PFOA and PFOS) were found in exceedance of that level. The
measures also provide information on the water systems where samples were taken and no chemicals were detected.

Click to view drinking water data.

Environmental Quality Vv

Environmental Quality Index (EQI)

This indicator presents data from five individual domains (air, water, land, built environment, and sociodemographics)
plus a combination of the five domains (overall environmental quality index) to provide a snapshot of environmental
quality for all counties across the United States. Low index scores indicate higher environmental quality, and higher index
scores mean lower environmental quality. The source for these data is the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

Heart Attacks Vv

Heart Attack Hospitalizations

This indicator uses data collected by hospitals and estimates the number and rate of people who were admitted to the
hospital due to heart attack. It can be used to identify trends and patterns in hospitalizations due to heart attacks. The
data are organized by different variables to help estimate the number of hospital admissions for heart attacks. The
variables include time periods, age groups, gender, and geographic areas such as states and counties.

Heart Disease Mortality

These indicators used data collected by vital records from CDC's National Center for Health Statistics. Data can be used to
identify trends in the mortality of heart disease (heart attack, coronary heart disease). The variables include time periods,
age groups, sex, race/ethnicity, and geographic areas such as states and counties.

Click to view heart disease and stroke data.

Heat-related Illness wy

Heat Stress Emergency Department Visits
This indicator estimates the number and rate of emergency department visits for heat stress. It includes all cases where
heat stress is listed as a primary or other diagnosis.

Heat Stress Hospitalizations
This indicator estimates the number and rate of hospitalizations for heat stress. It includes all cases where heat stress is
listed as a primary or other diagnosis.

Heat-Related Mortality
This indicator is based on data from death certificates to evaluate deaths that have identified heat as an underlying or
contributing cause.

Heat Vulnerability
This indicator includes measures that may make people at greater risk for heat-related health effects. These measures
are diabetes, heart disease, poverty, race, advanced age, social isolation, disabilities, population density, forest canopy,

developed land use, and cultivated crop land use.

Click to view heat and heat-related illness data.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/EnvironmentalJustice.htm



Page 144: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Environmental Justice | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Populations & Vulnerabilities Vv

Demographics

This indicator includes population estimates (number and percent) of people by race, ethnicity, age, gender, single-parent
households, speaking English less than “very well’, and aged 65 years and older and living alone. Data are presented at
Census tract, county, and/or state level for all states.

Life Expectancy at Birth
This indicator shows the average annual life expectancy at birth for a population over a 5-year period. Data are presented
at county and state level for all states. These data are estimates and cannot be used to predict an individual's life span.

Social Vulnerability Index

This indicator shows relative vulnerability of every U.S. Census tract on 14 social factors including poverty, lack of vehicle
access, and crowded housing. The factors are grouped into four related themes. Each Census tract receives a ranking for
each variable, each theme, and an overall ranking. These data can be used by public health officials and local planners to
better prepare communities to respond to emergency events like severe weather, floods, disease outbreaks, or chemical
exposure. Depending on the year, data are available at the Census tract and county level for all states.

Socioeconomic Status
This indicator includes data on poverty, household income, employment status, and high school (or equivalent)
graduation status. Data are presented at Census tract, county, and/or state level for all states.

Click to view populations and vulnerabilities data.

Flood Vulnerability Vv

Flood Vulnerability

This indicator provides county-level estimates on the total area and percentage of total areas within a flood hazard zone,
as well as the number of residents and housing units per county in a 100-year flood zone. The data use flood hazard risk
areas defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

Click to view precipitation and flooding data.

Birth Outcomes ea

Prematurity among Singleton Births

This indicator tracks the occurrence of premature single births. This indicator can be used to identify trends and patterns
in premature births. It can also be used to evaluate the effectiveness of public health actions and interventions for
preventing prematurity. These data are available at the state and county level.

Low Birthweight among Singleton Births

This indicator tracks the occurrence of low birth weight (LBW) among full-term, single birth newborns. It can be used to
track the perinatal health because LBW is an important predictor of perinatal morbidity and mortality. It can also be used
to evaluate the effectiveness of public health actions and interventions for preventing LBW. Baseline data can be used to
monitor changes or trends. These data are available at the state and county (or census tract at state level where
appropriate) level.

Infant Mortality

This indicator helps to identify populations with higher rates of infant mortality for all infants (under 1 year of age),
neonates (infants younger than 28 days), perinates (infants at 28 weeks gestation to younger than 7 days old), and post-
neonates (infants aged 28 days to < 1 year). These data can be used to assist with targeting outreach intervention
activities. It can also be used to improve our understanding of geographic variation, time trends, and demographic
patterns of infant death. These data are available at the state and county level.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/EnvironmentalJustice.htm



Page 145: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Environmental Justice | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Click to view reproductive and birth outcomes data.

Environmental Justice Dashboard

Le
ee ee ee Sy

bo La
TRACKING 2

Environmental Justice data tools can help determine communities at risk, help make informed policy decisions, and helps
everyone learn more about how the environment affects their health.

EJ Efforts Across the Country

CDC funds 26 state and local health departments to develop their own tracking networks, which feed into the national
Tracking Network. Several of these tracking programs are working closely with their environmental justice communities and
have created tools and resources specifically for their jurisdictions.

California[4 | Colorado [4 | Maryland[4% | Massachusetts [4% | Oregon [4 | Washington 4

Environmental Justice Resources

e Environmental Justice Resource Inventory

e Environmental Justice Dashboard

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/EnvironmentalJustice.htm

6/8



Page 146: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Environmental Justice | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Explore Environmental Justice Data

Data Explorer

x

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/EnvironmentalJustice.htm

7/18



Page 147: 5/11/24, 4:03 PM Environmental Justice | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Corton fevge © dal ere

renee fog BH

aR men Pein om ng Be Pte et pee ge er ey ed Ea

dere rye seg eee | Pa od ce ee ee ee. rd ed ed!

dade Popesieres ary Ble | Perce col acieiy pee chee eed eit andres. wo ert Serco bee ne aed a |
Pa Pie Bl Pe ee hel ee de ed ee ee es eee ee ee ee ee ee ed ee
Berek: Peeve ra | Pairk eb A eS a 9! Wd oh
ee ee Bo ee Be al

Paar ak: Peri a ea Re, ame od eee) ieee i (Dad ea ae

dave Payee ere eee | red cd ca ee ed nr LS ad
fata"

dai Peters ere ees Peel aches i ee ee oe ee ee rerio 9 ead or es ed em acl

cme
PAST ied: Persie nhs a ies oe Peek ee i et Pome to
Cakes
dare. Pa ee es Par ot on ae ee ee
Cnicey

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: June 27, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/EnvironmentalJustice.htm



Page 148: 5/11/24, 2:14 PM Food and Waterborne Diarrheal Disease | CDC

fi DC Centers for Disease ©
x Control and Prevention

Food and Waterborne Diarrheal Disease

Diarrheal disease is a major public health issue in developing countries and, while not generally increasing in the United
States, remains a persistent concern. Exposure to a variety of pathogens in water and food causes diarrheal disease. Air and
water temperatures, precipitation patterns, extreme rainfall events, and seasonal variations are all known to affect disease
transmission. In the United States, children and the elderly are most vulnerable to serious outcomes, and those exposed to
inadequately or untreated groundwater will be among those most affected.

In general, diarrheal diseases, including salmonellosis and campylobacteriosis, are more common when temperatures are
higher, though patterns differ by place and pathogen. Diarrheal diseases have also been found to occur more frequently in
conjunction with both unusually high and low precipitation. Sporadic increases in stream flow rates, often preceded by rapid
snowmelt and changes in water treatment, have also been shown to precede outbreaks. Risks of waterborne illness and
beach closures resulting from changes in the magnitude of recent precipitation (within the previous 24 hours) and in lake
temperature are expected to increase in the Great Lakes region as a result of climate change.

CDC Food and Waterborne Diarrheal Disease Resources:

© Food Safety - guidance on food safety and foodborne illnesses and outbreaks
© Healthy Water - information and resources on drinking water and other Water, Sanitation, & Hygiene (WASH) topics

© Guidelines for the Management of Acute Diarrhea After a Disaster - disaster recovery information for healthcare
providers

© Warmer Water and Flooding Increase the Risk of Illness or Injury BA [PDF - 183 KB]
Page last reviewed: December 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/food_waterborne.htm



Page 149: 5/11/24, 2:14 PM Food Security | CDC

DC Centers for Disease —
y Control and Prevention

Food Security

\C ao s
Globally, climate change is expected to threaten food production and certain aspects of food quality, as well as food prices
and distribution systems. Many crop yields are predicted to decline because of the combined effects of changes in rainfall,
severe weather events, and increasing competition from weeds and pests on crop plants. Livestock and fish production are
also projected to decline. Prices are expected to rise in response to declining food production and associated trends such as
increasingly expensive petroleum (used for agricultural inputs such as pesticides and fertilizers).

While the U.S. will be less affected than some countries, the nation will not be immune. Health can be affected in several
ways. First, Americans with particular dietary patterns, such as Alaska Natives, will confront shortages of key foods. Second,
food insecurity increases with rising food prices. In such situations, people cope by turning to nutrient-poor but calorie-rich
foods and/or they endure hunger, with consequences ranging from micronutrient malnutrition to obesity. Third, the
nutritional value of some foods is projected to decline. Elevated atmospheric CO2 is associated with decreased plant nitrogen
concentration, and therefore decreased protein, in many crops, such as barley, sorghum, and soy. The nutrient content of
crops is also projected to decline if soil nitrogen levels are suboptimal, with reduced levels of nutrients such as calcium, iron,
zinc, vitamins, and sugars. This effect can be alleviated if sufficient nitrogen is supplied. Fourth, farmers are expected to need
to use more herbicides and pesticides because of increased growth of pests and weeds, as well as decreased effectiveness
and duration of some chemicals. Farmers, farmworkers, and consumers will be increasingly exposed to these substances and
their residues, which can be toxic. These impacts of climate change on the nutritional value of food exist within a larger
context. Other factors, such as agricultural practices, food distribution systems, and consumer food choices, also play key
roles. Adaptation activities can reduce the health-related impacts of some of the anticipated food security challenges.

CDC Food Security Resources:

e Nutrition - information and resources on a variety of nutrition topics

e Food Safety - guidance on food safety and foodborne illnesses and outbreaks
Page last reviewed: June 18, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/food_security.htm#print



Page 150: 5/11/24, 2:32 PM Frequently Asked Questions | VSP | CDC
Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Vessel Sanitation Program Home

Frequently Asked Questions

e What is infectious gastroenteritis?
e How does infectious gastroenteritis spread?
e Can infectious gastroenteritis be prevented?
¢ What should | do if | get sick with diarrhea or vomiting during a cruise?
e What can | do to stay healthy during a cruise?
¢ What additional measures do ships take when an increased number of passengers or crew get sick?
e The ship | sailed on had a lot of sick passengers or crew. Where can | find more information about the voyage?
e Why can’t children who are not toilet trained use the pools on cruise ships?
e Why isn’t the ship I'm looking for listed in the inspection database?

e More information

What is infectious gastroenteritis?

Gastrointestinal illness (gastroenteritis) is inflammation of the stomach and small and large intestines. The main symptoms
include vomiting and watery diarrhea. Other symptoms may include fever, abdominal cramps, nausea, muscle aches, and
headache.

Infections causing gastroenteritis can be viral, bacterial, or parasitic in origin. Norovirus is a common cause of viral
gastroenteritis found on cruise ships. Types of bacterial gastroenteritis infections include Escherichia coli and Salmonella.

How does infectious gastroenteritis spread?

Individuals who have gastroenteritis can spread illness to others by touching handrails, elevator buttons, shared utensils, and
other people while they are ill. Infections that cause gastroenteritis can also be spread through contaminated food or water.

Can infectious gastroenteritis be prevented?

Yes. You can reduce your chance of getting sick by washing your hands more frequently, keeping your hands away from your
mouth, and avoiding any food or water that may be contaminated.

When a higher than expected number of cruise ship passengers or crew get sick with infectious gastroenteritis, ships use
additional cleaning procedures and disinfectants to stop illness.

For more information on handwashing tips and techniques, visit Keeping Your Hands Clean on a Cruise.

To learn more about viral gastroenteritis, visit the CDC Norovirus website.
Top of Page

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/pub/faq/faq.htm



Page 151: 5/11/24, 2:32 PM Frequently Asked Questions | VSP | CDC

What should | do if | get sick with diarrhea or vomiting during a cruise?

If you get sick during a cruise, visit the ship’s medical center and follow the instructions of the medical staff aboard the ship.
Be considerate of others, and wash your hands more frequently.

What can | do to stay healthy during a cruise?

For tips to stay healthy on your cruise vacation, see our tips for healthy cruising.
What additional measures do ships take when an increased number of
passengers or crew get sick?

CDC may advise ships to do the following to reduce the spread of gastroenteritis on board:

e Implement additional disinfection measures and cleaning procedures.

Advise sick passengers and crew to Stay in their cabins until they are well for 24 hours after their last episode of diarrhea
or vomiting.

e Report numbers of illness cases to CDC on a daily basis.

e Stop doing certain high-risk activities or activities during a cruise.

The ship | sailed on had a lot of sick passengers or crew. Where
can | find more information about the voyage?

The VSP website lists voyages during which the percentage of sick passengers or crew who reported their illness was over 3%.
The website also lists additional outbreak prevention and control strategies conducted by the cruise line. You can find more
information about the voyage on our outbreak webpage.

Why can't children who are not toilet trained use the pools on cruise ships?
Children who wear any type of swimming diaper or other diapers are not allowed in pools because fecal matter may
contaminate the water. This can expose other swimmers to fecal matter that is potentially infectious.

Why isn’t the ship I’m looking for listed in the inspection database?

The ship may not be in the inspection database because it does not meet the criteria for VSP inspection. It might not have

e A foreign itinerary,
e AUS. port, or

e More than 13 passengers.

Looking for more information?

Visit our home page.
Top of Page
Last Reviewed: October 19, 2018

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/pub/faq/faq.htm



Page 152: Guidelines for, Examining
Unusual Patterns of eed f

re

anc En jonmenta eal Cures

ry i d f
ot

> —

Web accessible version:
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/cancer-environment/guidelines




Page 153: Prepared by:

Stephanie L. Foster, MPH1?, Amy M. Lavery, PhD, Suzanne K. Condon, MSM3, Alisha A.
Etheredge, MPH?, Brian S. Kennedy, MPP?, Erik R. Svendsen, PhD?, Patrick Breysse, PhD?

1Division of Environmental Health Science and Practice, National Center for Environmental Health,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Office of Innovations and Analytics, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry

3Office of the Director, National Center for Environmental Health, Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention



Page 154: Summary

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) National Center for Environmental Health (NCEH)
and the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) provide scientific guidance to state,
tribal, local, and territorial (STLT) health departments related to environmental health concerns. The
guidelines presented here update the 2013 publication, “Investigating Suspected Cancer Clusters and
Responding to Community Concerns: Guidelines from the CDC and the Council of State and Territorial
Epidemiologists (CSTE)”.* In general, STLT health departments play the primary role in examining
unusual patterns of cancer in communities, including those associated with local environmental
concerns. These guidelines expand the approach for these investigations. Occupation-related clusters
are not included in these guidelines.

Notable enhancements to the previous guidelines (referred to hereafter as the 2013 Guidelines) include
the following:
e Expanding the name of the guidance document to include examining patterns of cancer and
environmental concerns

e Revising the definition of a cancer cluster cancer and introducing the concept of “unusual
patterns of cancer” to describe situations that may warrant further assessment

e Including specific and standardized approaches to better engage community advocates

e Providing a standardized template to better document the nature and extent of cancer and
environmental concerns

e Updating approaches to identify and investigate unusual patterns of cancer, including the
suggestion for proactive evaluation and routine monitoring

e Suggesting what information to share with CDC/ATSDR

e Enhanced appendices describing statistical and geospatial methods supporting the evaluation of
unusual patterns of cancer

While the revised guidance includes new methods to better engage with community members and
advocates, statistical and other scientific challenges may make it difficult to directly associate factors
that may play a role in the cause(s) of unusual patterns of cancer. Although limitations and challenges
remain, the revised guidelines propose an approach to identifying and investigating unusual patterns of
cancer as part of routine surveillance activities as well as new criteria and decision trees for responding
to cancer and environmental concerns.

Methods

CDC Guidelines for investigating clusters have been transformed over the past few decades. The
timeline in Figure 1 summarizes the history and highlights events that helped prompt revisions.



Page 155: Figure 1. Historic Timeline of the CDC Guidelines

Original Guidelines Published

CDC published Guidelines for Investigating Clusters of Health Events.
These original guidelines focused on noninfectious health events such as
chronic diseases, injuries, and birth defects.

1990

Workgroup Convened to Revise Guidelines

CDC and CSTE convened a workgroup to revise the guidelines to assist
state and local health officials better address community concerns
associated with cancer. This workgroup included experts (e.g.,
epidemiologists, environmental health specialists, health department
personnel, communicators) with experience responding to concerns
about unusual patterns of cancer.

2010

Revised Guidelines Published
CDC and CSTE published revised guidelines in the Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report. The revisions focused on cancer clusters.

2013

2016 Trevor’s Law Signed into Law

President Barack Obama signed into law the Frank Lautenberg Chemical
Safety for the 21st Century Act. Section 33—Trevor’s Law—calls for the
Department of Health and Human Services to provide periodic updates

to guidelines for investigating potential cancer clusters.

Guidelines Updated

In 2019, CDC received funding to update the 2013 Guidelines in
accordance with Trevor’s Law. NCEH/ATSDR developed a plan to ensure
the most current information and scientific methods as well as community
engagement and risk communication are considered for the next updates.
NCEH/ATSDR established a core team of experts in cancer research,
environmental health, and geospatial science to gather inputs and draft
the guidelines. The core team convened a CDC/ATSDR-wide steering
committee and other experts to inform the update.

2019-
2021

Updates Published
CDC/ATSDR published updated guidelines.

2022

A variety of inputs informed the update:

Literature reviews

Media scan

Subject matter expert input from academic partners, non-governmental organizations, the
steering committee, and other federal partners

Input from state, tribal, local, and territorial (STLT) partners

Input from members of the public and advocacy groups that have been involved with cancer
concerns in their communities



Page 156: CDC/ATSDR also evaluated advances in the fields of environmental epidemiology, geospatial methods,
cancer genomics, and community engagement strategies to determine the feasibility of incorporating
these elements to enhance the guidelines.

Literature Review

The literature review and search criteria were designed in collaboration with CDC’s Stephen B. Thacker
library. CDC/ATSDR reviewed peer-reviewed articles published since the literature review for the 2013
Guidelines, January 2010-April 2021. Because not all publications of cancer investigations conducted by
STLT departments appear in peer-reviewed literature, reports published on STLT health websites but not
in peer-reviewed journals (gray literature) were also reviewed.

The literature review focused on the following focus areas:
e Epidemiologic investigations of cancer clusters in community and residential settings
e Geospatial and temporal methods to evaluate clusters
e Rare-event and small-area-estimation statistical methods
e Novel approaches for grouping cancers by molecular characteristics
e Approaches for engaging, educating, and communicating with affected communities

Spatial statisticians and geospatial epidemiologists from ATSDR’s Geospatial Research Analysis and
Service Program (GRASP) and the NCEH National Environmental Public Health Tracking Program
(Tracking Program) established a geographic information systems (GIS) workgroup to focus on literature
specific to spatial cluster methods and GIS cluster resources.

Media Scan

A media scan assessed the communication landscape related to environmental hazards and excess
cancer. The media scan employed a two-phase approach to comprehensively review media around
specific cancer clusters.

Subject Matter Expert Input

CDC/ATSDR convened a panel with external scientific experts to provide subject matter expertise on
how to update the 2013 Guidelines, address any gaps in the guidelines, and incorporate new
approaches, particularly regarding methods of statistical analysis and community engagement. Experts
included representatives from STLT public health agencies, public health partner organizations, and
academia. Subject matter expertise included the following: assessing unusual patterns of cancer,
environmental epidemiology, environmental risk assessment, geospatial methods and statistics, cancer
registry data, pediatric oncology, community outreach, and risk communication.

Experts in cancer genomics from academia and the National Cancer Institute provided input on the
current state of the science in cancer genomics and applicability to evaluations of unusual patterns of
cancer. Results from subject matter expert discussions and the literature review indicate the need for
ongoing research in cancer genomics before these advances may be feasibly integrated into the
guidelines. CDC/ATSDR will continue to evaluate advancements in cancer genomics and provide updates
to the guidelines when appropriate.

STLT Survey
CDC/ATSDR developed a survey instrument to request information on STLT public health agency’s
approach, best practices, and capacity for addressing local cancer inquiries (OMB Control No. 0920-



Page 157: 1879, Expiration Date: 01/31/2021). The goal of the survey was to understand current and best practices
associated with the existing guidelines and to identify strengths, weaknesses, suggested revisions, and
resource needs for STLT public health officials to conduct investigations associated with local cancer
concerns. Members of the expert panel who currently or formerly served as state health officials pilot-
tested the instrument. The survey was sent to members of the Council of State and Territorial
Epidemiologists (CSTE), state Environmental Health Directors (SEHD) of the Association of State and
Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO), and Tribal Epidemiology Centers. The survey also asked STLT
partners to submit cancer cluster protocols and reports if available to include in the gray literature
review. The response rate from state health department partners was one hundred percent. Responses
were also submitted by two U.S. territories and the District of Columbia.

STLT Focus Groups

A series of focus groups with STLT public health agency professionals who respond to unusual patterns
of cancer in their communities (OMB Control No. 0920-1879, Expiration Date: 01/31/2021) provided
additional feedback for improving the guidelines and allowed discussion amongst STLT officials
regarding approaches to cancer cluster inquiries. Focus group questions primarily focused on best
practices, limitations, and common needs when addressing cancer cluster inquiries.

CSTE and ASTHO Workgroups

CSTE and ASTHO convened workgroups to review the 2013 Guidelines and provide feedback and
recommendations on facilitators and barriers to implementing the guidelines and specific tools,
trainings, and non-financial resources to enable STLT agencies to better implement the guidelines.
Workgroups were composed of individuals who were either previous or current state public health
officials routinely involved in addressing community concerns about unusual patterns of cancer. CDC
and ATSDR worked with CSTE and ASTHO to gain broad geographic representation among members.

Federal Register Notice Commentary

A request for public comment was released as a Federal Register Notice to solicit input from the public,
including individuals, community groups, and scientific and medical professionals.” The notice was open
from May 15, 2019, through July 15, 2019, for public comments. Public comments are available in the
federal docket.

A second FRN was published May 25, 2022. This solicitation was open for public comment for 60 days.
CDC/ATSDR received 46 sets of comments from state health departments, community members,
academicians, clinicians, cancer registries, non-governmental organizations, and private consultants on
behalf of trade associations. Modifications were made to the draft guidelines after careful consideration
and are summarized in the FRN announcement (https://www.regulations.gov; Docket No. CDC-2022-
0070) of the final publication of the guidelines.

Stakeholder Meeting

NCEH/ATSDR conducted a stakeholder meeting in April 2021 to obtain input from non-governmental
organizations, academicians, clinicians, and community members regarding the role their organizations,
connections, and similar organizations might play in responding to concerns about unusual patterns of
cancer. Stakeholder meeting participants were also asked to suggest the names of individuals who might
be willing to participate in community focus groups held in the summer and fall of 2021.



Page 158: Community Focus Groups and Interviews
Several methods helped to identify participants for community focus groups and interviews:
e Results of the media scan
e Input from the stakeholder-meeting attendees
e Suggestions from the STLT survey respondents
e Community members that have been involved in or are aware of excess cancer concerns or
investigations in their communities
e Community members representing environmental justice communities and tribes
e Academicians involved with cancer research in community settings

The goal of the focus groups and interviews was to gather feedback for ways to improve public health
and/or environmental officials’ communication and engagement with individuals and communities
concerned about environmental hazards and unusual patterns of cancer. Seven virtual community focus
groups and three interviews were convened throughout the summer and fall of 2021 (OMB Control No.
0923-0047, Expiration Date: 02/28/2022).

Internal and External Reviews

The draft guidelines underwent a series of internal and external federal agency reviews as well as an
external peer review. The guidelines were resubmitted for a final, rigorous internal CDC review and
approval process following revisions to address comments received from the 2022 FRN publication.

Cancer Characteristics, Definitions, and Recent Investigations

Cancer is not one disease, but rather many different diseases with different causal mechanisms that
share a similar characteristic: uncontrollable cell growth and division.** Cancers, as a group, are very
common. Cancers are the second leading cause of death in the United States, exceeded only by diseases
of the heart and circulatory system.“ According to the American Cancer Society, one of every two men
and one of every three women will be diagnosed with some form of cancer at some time in their lives.>*
Different cancers also have varying latency periods, which can also present challenges in the evaluations
of cancer patterns.”®

Given the frequency with which cancers are diagnosed, situations may arise where an unusual number
of primary-site cancers (i.e., place in the body where the cancer started) are diagnosed among people in
a particular location. It is possible this may be due to chance. These unusual patterns may also result
from the following:
e Differential recommended cancer screening practices
e Access to health care, which may be more reflective of other social and economic factors (e.g.,
limited access to optimal healthcare services)
e Genetic susceptibility to a particular cancer
e Behavioral risks and social determinants of health, occupational exposures, and in some cases,
exposures to environmental sources

Revised Definition of a Cancer Cluster and Consideration of Unusual Patterns
The intent of these guidelines is to enhance the historic approach for investigating community cancer
and environmental concerns.



Page 159: The 2013 Guidelines defined a cancer cluster as “a greater than expected number of cancer cases that
occurs within a group of people in a geographic area over a defined period of time.” CDC/ATSDR revised
the definition to recognize that some cancers may be similar etiologically (in terms of risk factors,
causes, or origin), and present the revised definition of a cancer cluster as “a greater than expected
number of the same or etiologically related cancer cases that occurs within a group of people ina
geographic area over a defined period of time.”

This definition can be further understood as follows:

e Agreater than expected number: When the number of observed cases is greater than typically
observed in a similar setting.

e Of the same or etiologically related cancer cases: Cases are of the same type, are within a
family of tumors (e.g., Ewing’s family of tumors), or have a known or suggested link to the same
specific environmental or chemical exposures. It is possible to consider multiple cancer types
when such a known exposure (e.g., radiation or a specific chemical) is linked to more than one
cancer type or when more than one contaminant or exposure type has been identified.

e Within a group of people: The population in which the cancer cases are occurring is defined by
its demographic factors (e.g., race, ethnicity, age, and sex).

e Ina geographic area: The geographic area may be based upon pre-existing geopolitical
boundaries (e.g., census tract, county, or ZIP code/ZIP code tabulation area). It may be defined
according to the nature and extent of potential exposures that may cross multiple or partial
boundaries. For example, air pollution from a hazardous waste incinerator which may cross
multiple counties or census tracts. These geographic boundaries are used to determine the
number of cancer cases as they relate to the total population in this predefined area. It is
possible to create or obscure a cluster inadvertently by modifying the area of interest.

e Over a period of time: The time frame used to establish the beginning and end dates for
analysis. The time period chosen for analysis will affect both the total cases observed and the
calculation of the expected incidence of cancer in the population.

It is possible that not every unusual pattern will meet the definition of a cluster as described above.
However, unusual patterns that meet some of the criteria and also have plausible environmental
concerns still warrant further evaluation or assessment. For example, many of the same cancer cases
may be present but may be dependent upon a factor such as a water distribution system rather than a
traditional boundary like a census tract or county.

With the advent of spatial statistics new approaches to determining if the probability of a spatial pattern
is likely, locating and quantifying the strength of spatial associations, and examining possible
relationships between a focused location and event occurrence are possible. Technical information
about the application of spatial and temporal methods are provided in Appendix B. Unusual patterns
and clusters are described in Phase 2.

Limitations Associated with the Investigation of Unusual Patterns of Cancer

Because cancer as a group of diseases is common, cases might appear to occur atypically within a
community. As the U.S. population ages, and as cancer survival rates continue to improve, in any given
community, many residents will have had some type of cancer, thus adding to the perception of excess
cancer cases in a community. Multiple factors affect the likelihood of developing cancer, including age,
genetic factors, and lifestyle behaviors.° An excess of observed cancer cases within a given population



Page 160: may occur as a result of statistical fluctuation and random chance and may also occur without a
discernible cause,?°1? given:

e Many types of cancer vary in etiologies, predisposing factors, target organs, and rates of
occurrence.

e Cancers often are caused by a combination of factors that interact in ways that are not fully
understood.

e For the majority of adult cancers, the long latency period (i.e., the time between exposure to a
causal agent and the first appearance of symptoms and signs) complicates attempts to associate
cancers occurring at a given time in a community with local environmental contamination. Often
decades intervene between the exposures that initiate and promote the cancer process and the
development of clinically detectable disease.1*

e Population mobility can also impact the ability to optimally determine the impact of
environmental exposures on disease occurrence.

Although the causes of many cancers are unknown, some causal relationships have been shown
between environmental exposures and development of cancer in specific organs (e.g., inhalation of
asbestos and mesothelioma).’* According to inputs received for these guidelines, health departments
respond to inquiries that typically stem from concerns that are predominately environmental. These
guidelines encourage the exploration of environmental concerns as further described in Phase 2.

Recent Cancer Cluster Inquiries and Investigations

The STLT survey asked health agencies to estimate the number of inquiries they receive about excess
cancer in the last 7 years (2013-2019). Based on the survey results, 53% of STLT agencies received 1-5
inquiries each year, 23% received 6—10 inquiries, 15% received 11-25 inquiries, and 6% received more
than 25 each year (note: Two agencies reported that they did not know how many inquiries they
received). STLT agencies received inquiries most often from individual residents, physicians and
healthcare providers, and community advocacy groups. More information from the STLT survey can be
found in the report.

CDC/ATSDR also conducted a comprehensive literature review to identify published studies investigating
non-occupational or non-disaster potential cancer clusters in the United States within the last 10 years
(January 1, 2010-April 8, 2020). Manuscripts reviewed discussed epidemiologic investigations of cancer
clusters and/or elevated cancer incidence in communities.’**? Most investigations were prompted by a
suspected environmental exposure. A brief summary of the articles is provided below.

Overall, the findings revealed the following:

e The populations within these investigations varied in size, age group, and by cancer types
studied.

e Ecological study designs were most often implemented, followed by case-control and cross-
sectional study designs.

e Cancer registry data were used for cancer outcome data in the majority of studies; alternately,
some studies used medical records as the source of cancer outcome data.

e Potential exposures were ascertained using a variety of methods including surveys,
environmental sampling, biological sampling, interviews, surrogate exposures (e.g., using the
distance from a nuclear power plant to a ZIP Code as a proxy for individual exposure”), and pre-
existing data from the Environmental Protection Agency and/or state health departments.



Page 161: e The majority of studies used geospatial methods to identify spatial patterns or to generate
standardized incidence ratio maps.

e Results of the studies varied. While some were unable to identify associations between cancer
and environmental exposures,'**¢ several demonstrated statistically significant associations,
with noted limitations.?” 3

From this literature review, several articles reported a statistically significant association between the
specified cancer and the exposure measure of interest but cited some limitations with interpreting the
data. Of note, in epidemiology an association does not equate to causation. Many of these limitations
are inherent to an ecological study design (see Phase 3 for more details). Limitations include the inability
to measure the exact exposure biologically and instead relying on proximity to sites as an opportunity
for exposure, the inability to measure lifestyle or behavioral risk factors that are associated with
increased cancer risk, and challenges with modeling water or air movements that impact potential
exposures.

Recognizing that the work of state health partners may be released as reports and not as published
literature, a search of the gray literature was conducted to supplement the articles identified in the
peer-reviewed literature. These reports aligned with feedback from the STLT and community focus
groups and provided information relative to techniques and methodologies being used across public
health agencies.

Proactive Evaluation and Routine Monitoring of Cancer Data

Evaluating unusual patterns of cancers most commonly begins with an inquiry originating outside of a
STLT partner organization and mostly from community concerns. While it is important for communities
to be able to identify concerns and bring them to health departments, STLT partners have access to
cancer data that can be evaluated in a proactive manner. Based on STLT survey feedback, about half of
the responding public health agencies analyze cancer incidence data on a routine basis to proactively
look for geographic areas with elevated cancer rates. Therefore, in addition to describing responsive
approaches for addressing concerns raised by communities, the guidelines encourage proactive
evaluation of cancer registry data to monitor cancer trends and identify unusual patterns.

The proactive evaluation of cancer registry data is consistent with the 10 Essential Public Health Services
(EPHS) by sustaining an ongoing understanding of health in the jurisdiction through the collection,
monitoring, and analysis of health data and other factors to identify threats, patterns, and emerging
issues, notably with an emphasis on disproportionately affected populations.**° State resources may
limit or impact the frequency for which state health departments have capacity to do proactive
monitoring or carry out routine monitoring. Further, geographic areas with small populations and
selection of geographic boundaries may impact the frequency with which this type of monitoring may
detect meaningful differences. Figure 2 outlines the enhanced process for evaluating patterns of cancer
routinely and evaluating community inquiries about unusual patterns of cancer and environmental
concerns. More details associated with the process are provided later in this document.

10



Page 162: Figure 2. Summary of the Revised Guidelines and Process

Routine Incoming
monitoring community
inquiry

11



Page 163: Strengthening Partnerships
All states have population-based cancer registries and conduct routine reviews of cancer incidence data.
While cancer registry personnel (as data stewards) routinely review data, partnering with
epidemiologists, statisticians, environmental health scientists, and other agency health officials who
conduct community cancer investigations could promote the following:

e Awareness and attention to unusual patterns of cancer

e Amore routine and robust evaluation of cancer data

e Amore proactive (as opposed to responsive) approach to the evaluation of cancer data

State program organization and resources differ, and it may be useful to clarify roles with community
members.

The Value of Making Cancer Rates Publicly Available

Strong partnerships between population-based cancer registries and other public health professionals
can aid in addressing community concerns and questions about unusual patterns of cancer within
certain geographic areas. One critical way to do this is for cancer registry, environmental health, and
other staff members to work together to make sub-state level cancer rates publicly available. To
supplement the annual review of cancer registry data, many states have provided data at a more
geographically granular level, while using methods to preserve privacy and confidentiality, (e.g., county
and census tract-level cancer rates) as part of the CDC Environmental Public Health Tracking
Program.?®?? Other states may have differing state laws or regulations or do not have the same
resources and expertise, and they may not be able to publish their cancer data similarly.

Evaluating Patterns of Cancer

Partnerships with cancer registry personnel and access to registry data enable state health officials to
calculate cancer-specific crude and adjusted rates for predetermined geographic locales such as
counties and census tracts. Health officials can use data available from state cancer registries to
proactively evaluate and routinely monitor estimates of expected rates for cancers and explore how the
rates compare to what is observed, which is known as calculating a standardized incidence ratio (SIR).

The SIR is an estimate of the observed cancers in a population compared to what might be expected if
the population had the same cancer experience as some larger comparison population, such as the state
as a whole.”° Age-adjusted county rates can generally be compared to the same cancer-specific, age-
adjusted rate estimated for that state.2°3° Appendix A further discusses considerations for calculating
the SIR and for reference populations. CDC’s National Environmental Public Health Tracking Program
publishes county-level cancer rates and counts as well as standardized incidence ratios on their Tracking
Network Data Explorer.31 Having these data readily available may allow states to proactively evaluate
and routinely monitor potential issues that may warrant further assessment. Additionally, the Tracking
Network Data Explorer also publishes environmental data facilitating further exploration of potential
risk factors, especially when resources to collect new data may be limited. If resources are available,
Phase 2 and the appendices of this document describe additional analytical methods for consideration.

If the observed number of cases is the same as the expected number of cases, the value of an SIR is 1.0,
sometimes multiplied by 100 for presentation. The interpretation of the SIR is not straightforward. For
routine evaluation, SIRs that deviate from 1.0 (or 100) may be examined further, with consideration of
the confidence intervals (see Appendix A for additional guidance). In addition to the SIR, programs may
consider visualization methods and techniques to examine cancer rates relative to the distribution of

12



Page 164: population characteristics and/or potential environmental risk factors.32 Programs may apply spatial,
temporal, or spatiotemporal methods designed to identify unusual distributions or unusual patterns to
evaluate the distribution of cancers either in supplement to, or in parallel with, routine evaluation of the
SIR (see Appendices A & B for more details).

Determining the Need for Criteria Evaluation

If an unusual cancer pattern is identified, STLT programs responsible for proactive evaluation and
routine monitoring of cancer rates should actively seek out other internal partners as appropriate (such
as cancer registry personnel, environmental public health programs, or cancer control programs) to
discuss findings, gather additional data, and develop a follow-up plan if warranted. Programs should
consider factors in the geographic areas where an unusual pattern was identified to determine steps in
further assessment. For example, there may be times when cancer control programs have enhanced
recommended cancer screening efforts in an area resulting in higher rates of a particular cancer. Other
risk factors such as smoking, physical activity, and nutrition can affect cancer incidence in a community.?
In other cases, small numbers may limit the interpretability of the findings and thus ongoing routine
monitoring to evaluate the pattern over time is optimal without the need for more immediate further
evaluation. However, in some instances, patterns may suggest the need for further evaluation and the
use of the 10-criteria assessment tool can be utilized (referenced in Phase 2: Assessment of Criteria).
Limitations associated with resources and data availability (for example, frequency of analysis, migration
of population, choice of geographic boundaries, or changes in other risk factors) may impact findings.

Processes should be in place in advance to inform communities when an unusual pattern is observed
and further assessment is warranted. Working with the agency’s communications team to discuss SIR
interpretations and messaging is an important step. Resource materials can be found on the Resources
and Tools webpage. Community discussions about how to move forward should consider specific
community needs (e.g., language and other cultural factors). Oftentimes local health officials are aware
of community leaders in their jurisdiction who might serve as a good partner and resource.

Additional Data Sources

Additional data sources may provide more timely information on cancer patterns. Mortality data may be
useful as a supplemental data source to the cancer registry data. State vital statistics registries provide
access to cancer mortality data.?? Review of mortality data may be particularly helpful in addressing or
understanding issues associated with disease burden or issues related to health equity such as
differential access to care. In addition, evaluating mortality data along with cancer incidence data may
provide insights regarding potential elevations in cancer that warrant further evaluation.

Electronic health record (EHR) data are becoming more readily available and may serve as an additional
data resource in the future. EHR data may provide access to timelier data that are able to reflect more
real-time reporting of cancer data. However, evaluations of the strengths and limitations of EHR as
surveillance tools may need to be addressed before these data are used routinely. Data modernization
activities at CDC are currently reviewing the feasibility of more routine usage of EHR data.

Responding to Community Concerns about Unusual Patterns of Cancer

STLT health officials often receive inquiries from the public about cancer occurrence within
neighborhoods or communities. Community members may contact the health department with

13



Page 165: concerns about local environmental conditions that may or may not be related to the cancer(s) of
concern. Initial contact with the person making the inquiry is a critical opportunity to understand their
concerns. At this early stage, listening skills are paramount to establish trust. This early interaction also
allows the health official and community member to explore optimal community engagement
strategies. In some cases, the inquirer is reaching out to the health department to provide information
and to seek information on the pattern of a particular cancer in a community, often due to a recent
cancer diagnosis in a family member or friend. In these situations, the health official can provide
information directly over the phone or through email communication. In other situations, the inquirer
may be seeking information on behalf of the community at large or a neighborhood or other
community-based organization. Gathering additional information will likely be necessary.

Communicating with and Engaging Communities

According to the American Cancer Society more than 1,000 suspected cancer clusters are reported to
state health departments within the United States each year.1°34 Although the specifics of each inquiry
may vary, STLT public health agencies should be prepared for these events.

Due to limits of epidemiologic and statistical methods, many investigations of unusual patterns of cancer
will be unable to establish a relationship between a specific environmental exposure and a health
outcome,’° and in some cases, there may be no relationship. This presents communication and
community engagement challenges. Discussion of challenges at the onset of community engagement
may enhance community understanding of scientific issues, including limitations upon which decisions
are based.”?5 As previously mentioned, a review of the roles and responsibilities of organizational units
may also be helpful in discussions with community members. Establishing clear and ongoing
communication channels about activities and challenges associated with the evaluation of unusual
patterns of cancer and environmental concerns is important.

Establishing and Maintaining Trust

Generally, early interactions with a health official will determine the level of trust and credibility a
community member may have throughout the assessment of health and environmental concerns.
Establishing and maintaining trust throughout an inquiry depends on the following:

e Listening to and understanding community concerns
e Ensuring equitable access to information
e Involving community members in the decision-making process

Different inquiries will require varying levels of community engagement. In many cases, an inquiry may
satisfactorily end after an initial conversation with the concerned inquirer. The inputs received as part of
the updates to the guidelines also highlighted the need for trust between communities and health
departments investigating community concerns about cancer.

Developing Communication Plans

STLT public health agencies can use cancer inquiries as a broader opportunity to 1) engage with the
communities they serve, and 2) inform community efforts to implement policies, plans, and laws that
impact health (including the removal of environmental burdens). Successful cancer investigations should
aim for optimal community engagement and participation to build trust in the public health system.

To accomplish this, public health agencies can develop a cancer and environmental health
communication plan and integrate risk communication principles throughout all steps of an inquiry. The

14



Page 166: plan should be clear and establish roles of health department personnel, including, but not limited to,
who will lead the further assessment of data and who will be the point of contact for community
members who are seeking information about the progress of the inquiry. Additionally, communications
staff members can assist with disseminating information through social media and other established
communication channels.

Using the Guidelines and Related Tools

This document provides suggestions for enhancing communication throughout the various phases of
responding to community concerns about unusual patterns of cancer. The 2013 Guidelines included a
communication appendix encouraging proactive communication, community involvement, and
transparency. In 2013, the National Public Health Information Coalition and CDC published a set of
accompanying tools for state health departments to assist in engaging with communities. As with other
tools and templates being developed, updates to the communication tools will be available on the
Resources and Tools webpage. These tools can be used or adapted by STLT public health agencies to
assist in their response. Additional resources are also provided in CDC’s Crisis and Emergency Risk
Communication manual and on ATSDR’s website, including the Community Stress Resource Center and
the Community Engagement Playbook.

Phased Approach to Respond to Community Inquiries
A phased approach to communicating with and engaging communities will help with the following:

e = Initiating lines of communication with the inquirer and community members
e Examining data and criteria aimed at evaluating the occurrence of cancer
e Exploring further epidemiologic studies

Information about the phased approach is provided in the sections below, and additional details can be
found in the Appendices.

Phase 1: Initiating Lines of Communication

The following section describes the information to collect (from the inquirer) and evaluate (using a
decision-making template and other information). Record the inquirer’s information in a standard intake
form to log when a call or email is first received. The intake form helps document if this is the first time
the person is calling, if the geographic area or cancer(s) of concern has been mentioned previously, and
if there are multiple people raising concerns about the same geographic area or cancer type(s).

The Cancer Inquiry Intake Form can be used to gather the following key information:

e = Inquirer information: Name, residential address, email address, telephone number, length of
residence at current location, and organization affiliation (if any)

e Inquirer information about the patterns of cancer: Types of cancer and number of cases of
each type, age at diagnosis of people with cancer, geographic area of concern, time period over
which cancers were diagnosed, and how the inquirer learned about concerns about cancer
patterns

e Other information: Any specific environmental concerns, other risk factors (e.g., occupation,
behavioral risk factors, and family history of cancer), concerns in the affected area (e.g., the
likely period of environmental contaminant exposures)

15



Page 167: Important reminders: If the inquirer requests anonymity, you should comply. But explain that
the inability to follow up with the caller might hinder further investigation. Keep in mind that
the inquirer might not have information to differentiate between primary site and metastatic
cancers and will most likely not be aware of all cases of cancer in the area or during the time
frame of concern.

Work with the inquirer to fully understand their range of concerns. In many cases the concerns
associated with cancer may be prompted by other factors that warrant separate and/or related follow
up (e.g., the presence of environmental hazards within a neighborhood or community). The Cancer
Inquiry Intake Form is available upon request under the forms section of the Resources and Tools
webpage. States may elect to share information from the form (excluding personally identifiable
information) with NCEH’s Health Studies Section. Sharing this information may allow for evaluation of
any potential regional or national trends requiring follow up and may allow federal officials to report the
number of community cancer inquiries occurring nationally.

Establish Points of Contact

For successful engagement it is important to establish points of contact at the health agency (agency
point of contact, aPOC) and within the community (community point of contact, cPOC). CDC/ASTDR
recommends the following when engaging with a cPOC:

Establish the communication process (e.g., email, phone contact, or some other communication
channel) as well as the time frame for future contact.

Determine the primary cPOC and gather that individual’s contact information. The cPOC may be
the inquirer. Alternatively, another individual(s) identified by the inquirer may serve as the cPOC
if they are viewed as a trusted representative of the inquirer and/or the community.

The aPOC should have strong empathy skills and experience in cancer epidemiology and/or experience
in environmental science. It is the responsibility of the aPOC to:

Provide an estimated timeline of when the aPOC will re-contact the inquirer/cPOC.

Listen to the inquirer and ask questions. Don’t dismiss the inquiry before gathering information.
Log and record all actions taken regarding the inquiry.

Relay information about what is being done about the inquiry to the inquirer. This
communication should be open, transparent, and thorough.

CDC/ATSDR further encourages establishing a team of colleagues to help address concerns over cancer
patterns prior to receiving inquiries. The aPOC can facilitate the creation of a team by:

Reaching out to collaborators to plan initial discussions about the cancer inquiry. Collaborators
could include other staff members within the health department (i.e., chronic disease and
cancer control program personnel, environmental health practitioners, cancer registry workers,
health educators, and geospatial specialists) and potentially other health agencies such as local
health jurisdictions, tribal health agencies, etc.

Reaching out to the state environmental regulatory agency if the inquiry is primarily regarding
an environmental contaminant.

Requesting technical assistance, if necessary. The following groups may provide or help
coordinate technical assistance:
oO CDC/NCEH Health Studies Section

16



Page 168: © ATSDR Office of Community Health Hazard Assessment, including regional staff
members
oO Regional Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Units (PEHSUs)

As mentioned in the proactive evaluation section, a similar approach can be considered when deciding
to move to Phase 2. Phase 2 is meant to build on the information gathered in Phase 1. Oftentimes
interactions with the community will end with providing educational materials about risk factors for the
cancer(s) of concern or information about the occurrence of the cancer(s) in the community. Pre-
developed materials or review of data from cancer registries or on the Tracking Network Data Explorer
can help provide guidance and education for the specific request and can help determine the need for
continued assessment. However, some situations may suggest the need for further evaluation. Methods
for reviewing data are further described in Phase 2.

Phase 2: Criteria to Determine Continued Assessment of a Report of an Unusual Pattern
of Cancer

This section outlines the process for reviewing data and criteria for decision making to determine
continued assessment. As described previously, population mobility, historic opportunities for exposure,
and other factors may limit analyses and interpretation of data. Other important considerations are
presented later in this section.

The following criteria are meant to assess the cancer(s) of concern and/or related environmental risk
factors. These criteria promote further assessment of unusual patterns of cancer that may not always
meet the formal definition of a cancer cluster. The form below (Figure 3) is included on the Resources
and Tools webpage and can be used as a decision-making guide for assessing the criteria. A discussion
on how to evaluate the criteria follows. Resources and capacity may dictate the extent to which the
criteria can be fully evaluated.

17



Page 169: Figure 3. Decision Making Form

Section 1: Considering the number of cancer cases and the rate of cancer in the area of concern

SUGGESTED ACTION/
CRITERIA RESPONSE FURTHER ASSESSMENT

1. For the cancer(s) of concern, is the observed number of cases more

than the expected number of cases?

2. Is the difference (in cases or rates) between the area of interest and
the comparison area statistically significant? ‘Noo

3. Is there an individual year or group of years responsible for an
elevated rate suggesting a temporal cluster and/or has the rate of
that cancer increased over time? ‘Noo

Consultation with other partners
within health department

4. Are the number or pattern of cancer deaths (as shown in
mortality/vital statistic data) elevated or unusual in the area of
concern?

Review screening, access to
health care and other measures
of potential health inequities

Consultation with other partners
within health department
and/or environmental agency;
Examine additional inputs such
as environmental or other
factors

5. Considering the geographic distribution of cancer cases, are cases
concentrated in any area suggesting a spatial cluster?

6. Do the cancers of concern share similar causes/risk factors and are
they elevated in the area of concern or neighboring areas (regardless
of geopolitical boundaries)?

£9

Consider mapping area of
concer and examining other
potential risk factors;
Consultation with other partners
within health department
and/or environmental agency

Section 2: Considering environmental risk factors

7. Has an environmental concern been raised as potentially being
related to the pattern of cancer in the area of concern’ ray
No 0 § Ye

8. ls there a plausible pathway of exposure between the suspected
environmental contaminants and the cancer(s) of concem in terms of
disease etiology?

Consultation with other

No [ partners within health

9. Does the scientific literature suggest that exposure to environmental department and/or
. : environmental agency;

contaminants may play a role in the development of the cancers of Consider additional

concern? geospatial methods

and analyses

10. What is the latency period for the cancer of concern and is it
consistent with the contaminant exposure timeframe?

18



Page 170: Proceeding based on Responses to Criteria
Use the following information below to determine next actions. A downloadable form can be on the
found in Resources and Tools webpage.

If ALL answers to sections 1 and 2 above are “No”
1. No further assessment needed at this time.
2. Summarize collected information in a written report or letter; provide summary to the
inquirer/cPOC. The summary should include the following:

e Background information on patterns of cancer observed (rates and geography)

e Anexplanation of how the agency investigated the inquiry about unusual patterns of
cancer

e = Areview of findings regarding the cancer(s) of concern

e Adiscussion of risk factors for the cancer(s) mentioned in the original inquiry

e Agency plans or next steps based on the findings

e Anote or reference about routine monitoring and follow up

3. Continue routine monitoring as appropriate, and plan to include this cancer and area of
concern in routine evaluation of cancer data (to determine if the pattern changes):

e Conduct routine monitoring aimed at identifying unusual patterns of cancer using
geospatial/statistical tools (and data that may be routinely available at geographic levels
lower than the state as a whole).

e Maintain the feedback loop with the original inquirer and establish procedures for
future updates (e.g., making more geographically granular data available on the health
department website).

If answer to question 1 is “Yes,” AND answer to any other question in section 1 is “Yes”

Further assess the cancer pattern. This assessment may include consultation and/or referral to a cancer
prevention and control program for consideration of intervention activities or additional information
gathering such as a case series analysis, described more in Phase 3. Further assessment could also
include defining the geographic area or time frame of concern using spatial and temporal methods.

If answer to any question in section 2 is “Yes”

Consider information from section 2 (environmental data and environmental risk factors) during the
additional assessment and/or referral to, or collaboration with, another agency (e.g., the local water
department, the state environmental regulatory agency, ATSDR).

In all of the scenarios presented above, the following actions should be considered:

e Communicate with the inquirer (about types of cancer and area of concern) to help raise cancer
awareness and provide a state/local health official the opportunity to explain how cancer rates
are calculated.

e Summarize the information from the decision template form (after completing Phase 2). This
summary should describe the information evaluated and what type of follow up steps might be
taken. The summary can also include next steps in terms of monitoring the pattern of the
cancer(s) of interest in the area of concern to determine whether the pattern of cancer changes.

e Consider presenting the information in a community meeting or public availability session, prior
to issuing any type of media release (if, for example, the inquiry was made on behalf of a
neighborhood or organized group).

19



Page 171: Considerations when Reviewing Data in Section 1

Use the statistical significance of the SIR as part of the criteria discussed below to help
determine next steps in the investigation. While statistical significance should not be the
deciding factor, it does provide some measure of whether cancer seems to be occurring
unusually in time, space, or both. Additional information for interpretation of results, such as
the magnitude of the estimate and a discussion of confidence intervals, is provided in Appendix
A.

Consider examining other factors such as access to care or recommended cancer screening rates
if an observed cancer rate is lower than expected.

Consider reviewing the distribution of diagnoses by characteristics such as age, sex, and
histology (cell type) compared to national and state distributions, which may highlight important
differences for review.

Look at incident cases for each year (if possible, for the cancer type) within the 5- or 10-year
period used to calculate the SIR or standardized mortality ratio (SMR) to determine the potential
for a temporal pattern. For example, are the majority of cases within the 5- or 10- year time
period occurring within a 1- or 2-year part of that overall period? This type of focused evaluation
of a potential temporal pattern can also be instructive in better understanding the potential for
some factor (or set of factors) to have played a role in cancer occurrence. Depending on the
cancer(s) of concern and the geographic area, small case numbers can impact analyses. Some
patterns observed in shorter time periods may be the result of other factors such as random
fluctuation or population movement over time.

Use mortality data to further determine patterns of cancer. In some cases, primary or secondary
intervention activities by other parts of the health department could be considered. For
example, if the incidence rate in the community is low, but the death rate is high for a particular
cancer, this may suggest inequities in access to healthcare and/or environmental justice issues.

Evaluate the geographic distribution of cancer cases within the area of concern to determine the
likelihood of a spatial cluster. Pre-defining the geographic boundaries for the area of interest
and qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the data is important in this process. Consider
limitations regarding population mobility and latency of specific cancers.

Evaluate the pattern of cancers of concern in neighboring areas (e.g., census tracts or
neighborhoods) and border communities within and across state lines. This may identify
regional trends and patterns. This is of particular importance if an environmental concern is also
expressed in the neighboring area. This approach provides an opportunity to evaluate
geographic patterns that may emerge without reliance on geopolitical boundaries.

When selecting comparison populations, ensure that areas that are similar demographically are
not also similar in terms of environmental hazards and contamination. Ensuring such
appropriate comparisons can help address issues of environmental justice and health equity.
See Appendix B for more about spatial and temporal methods to quantitatively evaluate unusual
patterns. Technical assistance can be requested from CDC/ATSDR if more guidance and
expertise are needed.

Data considerations discussed in the proactive evaluation section may also be useful in this
phase.

20



Page 172: Considerations when Reviewing Data in Section 2

Collaborate with internal and external partners, as needed, if an environmental concern is
identified or suggested. Collaborate with these partners to acquire or review environmental
data. Remember, the community member/inquirer may provide useful information associated
with environmental concerns, such as historic land use of the area or concerns about potential
contamination related to former use of a property. Census data can indicate population changes
over time, but the inquirer may also have qualitative, historic information relative to population
change. This information on population change and land use can have significant impacts on
decisions associated with the likelihood that exposure to environmental hazards might be
associated with cancer occurrence, particularly as it relates to cancer latency/development
periods as well as biologic plausibility.

Consider the biologic plausibility of the cancer(s) of concern being associated with the
environmental factors for investigatory purposes as well as for risk communication.
Consideration of the possible exposure routes is a principal factor in understanding whether
cancer and exposure to environmental agents are potentially connected. Responding to
environmental concerns may be important even if the cancer patterns do not suggest a
plausible relationship.

Other Considerations

Community members may have a list of individuals diagnosed with cancer or a map presenting
individual addresses. While health officials cannot publicly confirm whether individuals on such
a list or map have cancer (due to patient confidentiality and privacy laws), nor can they use
personally identifiable information (PII), some non-Pll information can help identify the types of
cancer(s) of concern as well as the time period and geographic area of interest. Cancer incidence
data must be confirmed through the cancer registry data. Sharing information about
confidentiality and privacy laws associated with individual health outcomes with the community
may be useful.

Periodically, community inquiries may involve concerns about unusual patterns of cancer(s) ina
school, preschool, or daycare setting, which can involve both students and staff members. Work
closely with school officials to determine the cancer(s) and environmental concerns reported,
the population at risk, and the time frame during which the cancers were diagnosed. For
concerns that include occupational populations (e.g., teachers and staff members), state and
federal occupational health officials should be consulted. Consider whether community-level
environmental factors or concerns are present and whether a community-based investigation
approach is appropriate. If the school setting remains the focus, information about the total
population at risk will be needed (specific to age and sex if possible) to calculate a cancer rate
among the relevant population, but such information might not be available. Population and
other sociodemographic data from the U.S. Department of Education’s National Center for
Education Statistics may be helpful. If population and case information is available, a similar
approach to addressing community-based concerns about unusual patterns of cancer can be
used for assessment in these settings.

Collaborate with other partners as needed. As mentioned previously, have a plan to reach out to
collaborators to discuss the cancer inquiry and data evaluation. Collaborators could include
other staff members within the health department and potentially other health agencies such as
local health jurisdictions or tribal health agencies. For example, concerns associated with

21



Page 173: occupational exposures should be discussed with state and federal occupational health officials.
PEHSU clinicians may offer information related to exposure risk reduction measures when
possible and provide several resources and expertise related to children, expectant parents, and
families. PEHSUs can provide technical environmental medicine expertise, advice on risk
reduction activities, and can be a trusted voice in community engagement.

Communication Reminders

Review with the inquirer what data was included in the assessment. When an SIR or SMR is
calculated, describe how the numerator and the denominator are determined, and explain how
these data are used to calculate an observed rate and an expected rate of cancer.

Describe the process used to evaluate cancer patterns in a given area. Discuss why rates are
generally calculated in 5- or 10-year intervals to enhance statistical stability due to the small
number of annual events in smaller geographic areas.

Explain how comparing cancer patterns across communities and/or counties is important.

Response Associated with a Need for Further Assessment

As mentioned above, a report should be prepared that summarizes all of the steps taken to evaluate the
information and concerns initially reported and why further assessment is advised. The report should
include the following:

Description of the results from the 10-criteria evaluation form to determine what further actions
are taken.

Assessment of any environmental concerns that have been expressed and/or explored

Clear description of next steps, if any

An estimated time frame for when the inquirer might learn of new information

The report should also include the following information, as appropriate:

f the next steps are associated with actions the responding program must undertake (e.g., a
case series analysis, case-control study, etc.), then describe the actions that would be necessary
to undergo such an analysis.

f the further assessment involves action by another program within the health agency, then
include the program and a contact person.

f the action(s) to be taken involve an agency external to the health department, then provide
the agency, program name, and a point of contact.

Establishing Strong Relationships and Partnerships with the Community

When further assessment activities are warranted, develop and implement a community engagement
plan. Developing a plan together with community partners to share information on a regular basis
regarding cancer and environmental health investigations will enhance trust and credibility. Consider
including the following people:

Personnel within the health department with expertise in establishing strong relationships, such
as public health nurses and/or social workers (i.e., to serve as aPOCs)

Local medical professionals, such as PEHSU clinicians
A trusted community member (i.e., to serve as a cPOC)

22



Page 174: Phase 3: Considerations for Epidemiologic Studies

Feasibility assessment

The feasibility of designing and conducting an epidemiologic study is dependent upon a variety of
factors. For that reason, a feasibility assessment should be conducted to determine whether it is
practical to conduct a study that would provide meaningful answers. The feasibility assessment should
address multiple issues, including, but not limited to, data availability, adequate sample size to detect
meaningful differences or associations, staff capacity, and other resources. In addition, to support
studies and investigations it may be important for STLT health departments to consider all sources of
funding and resources that may be available to them, including funding at the federal and state or local
level, as well as nontraditional sources of funding.

When it has been determined that an epidemiologic study is feasible, do the following:

e Schedule meetings to discuss the initial findings and proposed approach for further assessment
with the initial inquirer and other community members.

e Provide a detailed description of the next steps for evaluation. These next steps should be
based on summary findings from the analysis of the 10 criteria in Phase 2.

e Develop a summary that includes a rationale for continuing the investigation. For example, the
assessment identified a potential spatial cluster or environmental factors that warrant further
exploration.

Establish a Community Advisory Committee

A community advisory committee (CAC) can contribute valuable sources of information and liaise with
other community members. A CAC can provide specific details on the community, including help with
cultural sensitivities or knowledge of current and/or historical environmental concerns in the area. A
CAC can serve as a communication link back to the community at large.

Open communication will be needed to set goals, establish timelines, and discuss other issues (e.g.,
possible study limitations) so that expectations are clear. As previously mentioned, it may be important
to also discuss issues related to resource requirements and other barriers that may impact conducting
an epidemiologic study. Every community is different; however, agencies may be able to work with
some existing organizations (e.g., neighborhood or religious organizations) to establish a CAC.

CAC and other community members can provide important insight and assist investigations:
e Help promote participation in studies and conduct outreach

e Identify specific tasks for community members that would contribute to the success of the
investigation

e = Identify additional data sources within the community (e.g., local lists that may be maintained
which would identify previous residents)

e Identify population mobility patterns and housing development considerations

Consider the Following for Study Design and Protocol Development

The following sections highlight the most important considerations for study design and protocol
development. Consider developing a peer review committee with external partners to assess study
design issues. Committee members should have a breadth of related skill sets in epidemiology, cancer,

23



Page 175: biostatistics, toxicology, and environmental health. The final draft of the protocol should be shared with
the CAC in advance of initiating the study.

Case Definition

Generate a formal case definition ahead of further analyses. Include the type of cancer, the population,
the geographic area of concern, and the time period of interest. Review the study area and revise (if
necessary) before starting additional analyses. For example, early assessments may have indicated that
a particular contaminant was of concern and that more populations were found to be at potential risk
for exposure to this contaminant. Thus, the study area would be expanded to include the other
populations who were at potential risk for the exposure of concern.

Hypothesis

A hypothesis regarding cancer cases or potential environmental contaminants was likely already
generated during the assessment phase. However, hypotheses can evolve during an investigation,
particularly if a potential exposure source has not been identified.?° Re-review and update hypotheses
regarding the cancer cases and contaminant(s) of interest (i.e., based on observations within the
assessment phase to formulate analyses a priori). The hypothesis helps to guide the collection of data,
the analysis plan, and interpretation of results.

Study Population
Define the population of interest for the study. Ask the following questions to help define the study
population as well as the time period of interest:

e How are the boundaries defined for the geographic area of interest?

e What are the characteristics of the population? Are there specific characteristics that are noted
for the people with cancer (i.e., age group, race/ethnicity)?

e What is the latency period for the particular cancer(s) of interest? What years of residence
would need to be included to reflect the latency/development period assumed for the cancer(s)
of concern?

e How long have the residents lived in the area? What is the mobility and migration of former
residents?

e Is there a potential for in utero exposures for the cancer(s) of concern based on where the
mother lived during pregnancy?

Latency

Latency and change of residence add to the complexity of these investigations. Because residential
history data are generally not available, collecting such data is critical as part of any epidemiologic study.
Given the long latency period associated with cancers in adults, behaviors and exposures that might
have contributed to the development of cancer in a person typically occur years to decades before the
diagnosis. For example, malignant mesothelioma, a tumor of the lining of the lung, is associated with
asbestos exposure, and the latency period between first exposure to asbestos and death from
mesothelioma is often 30 years or longer.°°

Latency in an epidemiologic investigation influences the exposure period relevant to the investigation.
For example, if a person with cancer did not live in the suspected area of cancer concern during the
relevant exposure period, then that person’s cancer would not likely be related to an exposure in the
area of concern. Conversely, the latency period might limit the ability to detect unusual patterns of

24



Page 176: cancer or identify cancers related to an environmental exposure that occurred in the past. In a mobile
population, patterns resulting from an environmental contamination occurring years or even decades
earlier might go undetected because exposed residents may have moved away from the community
before the cancer developed. Thus, as persons move in and out of different communities, their
cumulative exposure profile will change.

Because childhood cancers generally have shorter latency periods than cancers in adults, changes of
residence might be less of an issue in the investigation of unusual patterns of childhood cancers.
However, childhood cancer investigations may have the same limitations as adult counterparts. For
example, in one California study of 380 children with a diagnosis of leukemia, approximately 65% of the
study participants changed residence between birth and diagnosis,’ indicating that even among cancers
with short latency periods, migration might be an important factor. Account for latency when designing
any additional analyses or studies.

Additional environmental data

If additional environmental data are needed, partner with state or local environmental regulatory
agencies. ATSDR, including the regional offices, can also provide technical assistance, such as review of
environmental sampling plans. Outline the types of sampling needed and resources available or
necessary to conduct such sampling. Also, consider the following:

e Potential sources and routes of exposure (e.g., through air inhalation, water ingestion, in utero)

e Contaminant transport (e.g., if exposure occurs via ambient air, meteorological factors such as
wind direction and speed are important)

e Other contributing sources of exposure

e Boundaries of potential spread/movement (important to understand the potential at-risk
population)

e Any prior or ongoing remediation or reduction activities related to the environmental concern of
interest

e Role of participating agencies in data collection and identification of resources to support the
collection of environmental data.

Existing health data for case finding

Primarily, cases of cancer among the study population are identified from a state’s cancer registry, using
the case definition. Consider multiple existing data sources for use to help identify cases. Forming
partnerships with health information exchange or network entities may help with identifying other
existing data sources. For additional support and guidance, CDC/ATSDR can provide technical assistance.

Contributing risk factors

An environmental factor may have been identified as a potential risk factor for the cancer of interest;
however, cancers may be caused by several different risk factors or through multiple causal
mechanisms.® Review additional risk factors for the type(s) of cancer under investigation, such as social
determinants of health, behavioral risks, occupational exposures, and in some cases genetic factors.

Types of Epidemiologic Studies to Consider
Methods used in environmental epidemiology are observational, not experimental. This makes the
process of identifying a causative agent more difficult because researchers may not have access to

25



Page 177: information about other exposures or other variables that can create bias in the analysis.293°38 However,
additional studies can potentially help make inferences about cancer cases and potential associations.
Consider the following types of descriptive or analytical studies:

e  Case-series study: A case-series study is a descriptive analysis of persons with a similar cancer
diagnosis. This study can be particularly helpful when there are small numbers of cases and it is
not feasible to pursue other studies (e.g., statistical challenges associated with a small number
of individuals diagnosed with the disease). Case-series studies are often designed to collect
more information about each person to identify any commonalities. For these studies, identify
as many relevant cases as possible to avoid selection bias. Depending on the findings, a further
analytical study may be possible or warranted (see case-control or cohort below).

e Ecological study: An ecological study compares aggregated environmental data to aggregated
cancer data to examine general associations. Exposures and outcomes are generally grouped to
a geographic area, such as a census tract, for comparison. Individual exposures are not included
in an ecological analysis. Ecological studies are most often done initially to explore potential
associations but alone cannot determine causality. Epidemiologists must use caution when
interpreting this type of analysis because the association with a particular environmental
contaminant might not be true for individual cases, especially if there is heterogeneous
distribution of the exposure over the geographic area. The related bias is known as ecological
inference fallacy and could result in exposure misclassification.

e Cross-sectional study: A cross-sectional study is another descriptive study that measures health
outcomes and exposure factors during a specific point in time. This type of study is helpful in
describing the frequency of different characteristics in a study population during the time frame
of interest. However, it may not be the ideal study design for investigating unusual patterns of
cancer because this type of study design only looks at data distributions in a specific time frame,
and temporal patterns cannot be established. In instances when biomarker data are available, a
cross-sectional study may provide insights about key exposures among the population.

e Case-control study: Consider a case-control study when the etiology of the cancer is unknown.
This type of analytical study can also be used to assess the association between cancer and a
presumed exposure while being able to control for confounding factors. A case-control study
collects information from cancer cases meeting the case-definition and controls within the same
study area. Exposures and risk factors are compared between the two groups, for example using
regression analysis methods. Case-control studies are suggested for rare cancer outcomes.
Unlike the ecological study, case-control studies allow for the collection of individual-level data
and risk factors to assess within the analyses. The primary disadvantages of a case-control study
are the inability for individuals to recall historic events (e.g., exposures) and the difficulty of
providing a direct estimate of risk. Risk is often estimated as an odds ratio, showing the odds for
a particular cancer to have occurred given a particular exposure, compared to odds of the same
cancer without the exposure. For this type of study, the sample size needed should be
calculated ahead of time considering the power needed to detect statistical differences between

the populations (Appendix A).

e Cohort (retrospective or prospective): Consider a cohort study when the exposure source is
known or being investigated. Select people who have varying levels of exposure for the study.
Prospective cohort studies, while one of the strongest types of studies to examine exposure-

26



Page 178: disease relationships, are very time consuming and expensive. Depending on the latency of the
cancer(s) of concern, a prospective cohort study may need to be 10-20 years or longer to collect
enough data for analyses. The length of time needed often must account for study attrition and
thus require a very large sample size.

A retrospective cohort study may be feasible, but also is reliant on time-related information. For
example, a cohort study may want to compare a population exposed to chemicals from Factory
X, which was operating in the early 1990s. To establish a study cohort, a population within that
community would have to have been in the study area ~30 years previously. Because of the
length of time needed for these studies, some challenges may arise that need to be accounted
for within the study design. For example, a community may have experienced a substantial
percentage of movement or migration.

Also, as previously mentioned, the latency of the cancer will also need to be accounted for
within the study design. For example, the average latency for mesothelioma is generally thought
to be decades.?9 More recently, data from the World Trade Center Health Program suggests that
the minimum latency for mesothelioma is about 11 years and the minimum latency for thyroid
cancer is 2.5 years.® Studies assessing these types of cancers would have to account for the
number of years that specific types of cancers develop following exposures. Additionally,
limitations exist with quantifying historic exposures for retrospective cohort studies.

Ongoing technical and scientific advancements in areas such as data science, analytic and geospatial
methods, and cancer genomics may be available in the future (e.g., genomic research, gene-
environment interaction).

Other Considerations for Your Study
When evaluating the feasibility of different epidemiologic studies, consider the following:

e Funding: Funding may be needed to help with the investigation. Seek state and federal
opportunities to assist with funding the investigation or with providing technical assistance. In
addition, academic partnerships may help to support the investigation.

e Outreach: For more robust analyses, reach out to other states to discuss case-finding and/or
environmental sampling activities, specifically in neighboring states if suspected environmental
contaminants cross state borders.

e Communication: Ultimately, the goal of an epidemiologic investigation of unusual patterns or
excesses of cancer is to understand the potential relationship between environmental and other
risk factors identified and observed cases of cancer. Some epidemiologic investigations have
identified potential associations between certain cancers and risk factors including exposures to
certain chemicals.*°** However, methodological limitations and data limitations (such as
unknown levels of exposure) often limit the ability to demonstrate that such relationships exist.
Regardless of the outcome of an epidemiologic investigation, continuing to communicate with
individuals most concerned about exposures and health outcomes is important.

CDC/ATSDR are available to provide technical assistance and guidance (CCGuidelines@cdc.gov).
Additional resources for examining unusual patterns of cancer and environmental concerns are available
on the Resources and Tools webpage.

27



Page 179: Acknowledgment List:

CDC/NCEH/ATSDR Leadership - Pamela Protzel Berman, William Cibulas

CDC/ATSDR Internal Steering Committee -Johnni Daniel, Vivi Siegel, Nicole F. Dowling, Elizabeth
Irvin, Jessica Rinsky, Sophia Chiu, Doug Trout, Tegan K. Boehmer

Geospatial Research Team - Caitlin Mertzlufft, Angela Werner, Liora Sahar, Marissa Grossman,
Brian Lewis, D. Aaron Vinson, Frank Curriero, Trieste Musial, Michel Conn, Amir Mirsajedin
ORISE Fellows - Lauren Byrne, Diana Diaz

Communications and Web Team - Traci Augustosky, Preston Burt, Sarah Segerlind, Teresa Sims,
Renee Leach, Kristen Dortch

All those who provided input to the guideline revisions including NCEH/ATSDR Board of Scientific
Counselors (sunset); Trevor Schaefer, Charlie Smith, and other stakeholder meeting participants
and community members; STLT health officials; CSTE; ASTHO/SEHD; and the participants of the
Expert Panel Forum.

28



Page 180: Appendix A: Statistical Considerations

This section provides general guidance regarding epidemiologic and descriptive statistical methods most
commonly used to assess occurrences of cancer. Frequencies, proportions, rates, and other descriptive
statistics are useful first steps in evaluating the suspected unusual pattern of cancer. These statistics can
be calculated by geographical location (e.g., census tracts) and by demographic variables such as age
category, race, ethnicity, and sex. Comparisons can then be made across different stratifications using
statistical summaries such as ratios.

Standardized Incidence Ratio

The standardized incidence ratio (SIR) is often used to assess whether there is an excess number of
cancer cases, considering what is “expected” to occur within an area over time given existing knowledge
of the type of cancer and the local population at risk. The SIR is a ratio of the number of observed cancer
cases in the study population compared to the number that would be expected if the study population
experienced the same cancer rates as a selected reference population. Typically, the state as a whole is
used as a reference population. The equation is as follows:

Observed Cancer Cases (0)
Expected Cancer Cases (E)

SIR

Adjusting for Factors

The SIR can be adjusted for factors such as age, sex, race, or ethnicity, but it is most commonly adjusted
for differences in age between two populations. In cancer analyses, adjusting for age is important
because age is a risk factor for many cancers, and the population in an area of interest could be, on
average, younger or older than the reference population.**“* In these instances, comparing the crude
counts or rates would present a biased comparison.

For more guidance, this measure is explained in many epidemiologic textbooks, sometimes under
standardized mortality ratio, which uses the same method but measures mortality instead of incidence
rates.?9345~4° Two ways are generally used to adjust via standardization, an indirect and a direct
method. An example of one method is shown below, but a discussion of other methods is provided in
several epidemiologic textbooks”? and reference manuals.*°

An example is provided in the Table 1 below, adjusting for age groups. The second column, denoted
with an “O,” is the observed number of cases in the area of interest, which in this example is a particular
county within the state. The third column shows the population totals for each age group within the
county of interest, designated as “A.” The state age-specific cancer rates are shown in the fourth
column, denoted as “B.” To get the expected number of cases in the fifth column, A and B must be
multiplied for each row. The total observed cases and the total expected cases are then summarized.

29



Page 181: Appendix A. Table 1. Age group specific expected cancer rate calculations and observed counts

Age group Observed County of State Age-Specific Expected Cancer
Number of Cases Interest Cancer Rate* Cases
in County* Population (B) (A x B= E)
(0) (A)

40-49 50 20,000 0.001 20

50-59 150 23,000 0.007 161

60-69 200 25,000 0.010 250

70+ 250 15,000 0.015 225

Total 650 656

*Number of cases in a specified time frame.
*Number of cases in the state divided by the state population for the specified time frame. Rates are typically
expressed per 100,000 or 1,000,000 population.

The number of observed cancer cases can then be compared to the expected. The SIR is calculated using
the formula below.

Observed Cancer Cases (0)
Expected Cancer Cases (E)

sir = 22 = 0.99
~ 656

Confidence Intervals

A confidence interval (Cl) is one of the most important statistics to be calculated, as it helps to provide
understanding of both statistical significance and precision of the estimate. The narrower the confidence
interval, the more precise the estimate.°°

A common way of calculating confidence intervals for the SIR is shown below”:

(VObserved + 1.96/2)?
Expected

95% CI

Using the example above produces this result:

(V650 + 1.96/2)?
95% CI = mG = (0.92 , 1.07)

If the confidence interval for the SIR includes 1.0, the SIR is not considered statistically significant.
However, there are many considerations when using the SIR. Because the statistics can be impacted by
small case counts, or the proportion of the population within an area of interest, and other factors, the
significance of the SIR should not be used as the sole metric to determine further assessment in the
investigation of unusual patterns of cancer. Additionally, in instances of a small sample, exact statistical

30



Page 182: methods, which are directly calculated from data probabilities such as a chi-square or Fisher’s exact test,
can be considered. These calculations can be performed using software such as R, Microsoft Excel, SAS,
and STATA.*? A few additional topics regarding the SIR are summarized below.

Reference Population

Decisions about the reference population should be made prior to calculating the SIR. The reference
population used for the SIR could be people in the surrounding census tracts, other counties in the state,
or the entire state. Selecting the appropriate reference population is dependent upon the hypothesis
being tested and should be large enough to provide relatively stable reference rates. One issue to
consider is the size of the study population relative to the reference population. If the study population
is small relative to the overall state population, including the study population in the reference
population calculation will not yield substantially different results. However, excluding the study
population from the reference population may reduce bias. If the reference population is smaller than
the state as a whole (such as another county), the reference population should be “similar” to the study
population in terms of factors that could be confounders (like age distribution, socioeconomic status,
and environmental exposures other than the exposure of interest). However, the reference population
should not be selected to be similar to the study population in terms of the exposure of interest.
Appropriate comparisons may also better address issues of environmental justice and health equity.
Ultimately, careful consideration of the refence population is necessary since the choice can impact
appropriate interpretation of findings and can introduce biases resulting in a decrease in estimate
precision.

Limitations and Further Considerations for the SIR

One difficulty in community cancer investigations is that the population under study is generally a
community or part of a community, leading to a relatively small number of individuals comprising the
total population (e.g., small denominator for rate calculations). Small denominators frequently yield
wide confidence intervals, meaning that estimates like the SIR may be imprecise.*° Other methods, such
as qualitative analyses or geospatial/spatial statistics methods, can provide further examination of the
cancer and area of concern to better discern associations. Further epidemiologic studies may help
calculate other statistics, such as logistic regression or Poisson regression. These methods are described
in Appendix B. Other resources can provide additional guidance on use of p-values, confidence intervals,
and statistical tests.29°04952>2

Alpha, Beta, and Statistical Power

Another important consideration in community cancer investigations is the types of errors that can
occur during hypothesis testing and the related alpha, beta, and statistical power for the investigation. A
type | error occurs when the null hypothesis (Ho) is rejected but actually true (e.g., concluding that there
is a difference in cancer rates between the study population and the reference population when there is
actually no difference). The probability of a type | error is often referred to as alpha or a.°?

a = Probability(reject Ho| Ho is true)

A type Il error occurs when the null hypothesis is not rejected and it should have been (e.g., concluding
that there is no difference in cancer rates when there actually is a difference). The probability of a type II
error is often referred to as beta or B.

B = Probability(do not reject Ho | Ho is false)

31



Page 183: Power is the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when the null hypothesis is actually false (e.g.,
concluding there is a difference in cancer rates between the study population and reference population
when there actually is a difference). Power is equal to 1-beta. Power is related to the sample size of the
study—the larger the sample size, the larger the power. Power is also related to several other factors
including the following:

e The size of the effect (e.g., rate ratio or rate difference) to be detected

e The probability of incorrectly rejecting the null hypothesis (alpha)

e Other features related to the study design, such as the distribution and variability of the
outcome measure

As with other epidemiologic analyses, in community cancer investigations, a power analysis can be
conducted to estimate the minimum number of people (sample size) needed in a study for detection of
an effect (e.g., rate ratio or rate difference) of a given size with a specified level of power (1-beta) and a
specified probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when the null hypothesis is true (alpha), given an
assumed distribution for the outcome. Typically, a power value of 0.8 (equivalent to a beta value of 0.2)
and an alpha value of 0.05 are used. An alpha value of 0.05 corresponds to a 95% confidence interval.
Selection of an alpha value larger than 0.05 (e.g., 0.10: 90% confidence interval) can increase the
possibility of concluding that there is a difference when there is actually no difference (Type | error).
Selection of a smaller alpha value (e.g., 0.01: 99% confidence interval) can decrease the possibility of
that risk and is sometimes considered when many SIRs are computed. The rationale for doing this is that
one would expect to see some statistically significant apparent associations just by chance. As the
number of SIRs examined increases, the number of SIRs that will be statistically significant by chance
alone also increases (if alpha is 0.05, then 5% of the results are expected to be statistically significant by
chance alone). However, one may consider this fact when interpreting results, rather than using a lower
alpha value.** Decreasing the alpha value used will also decrease power for detection of differences
between the population of interest and the reference population.

In many investigations of suspected unusual patterns of cancer, the number of people in the study
population is determined by factors that may prevent the selection of a sample size sufficient to detect
statistically significant differences. In these situations, a power analysis can be used to estimate the
power of the study for detecting a difference in rates of a given magnitude. This information can be used
to decide if or what type of statistical analysis is appropriate. Therefore, the results of a power
calculation can be informative regarding how best to move forward.

Additional Contributing Authors:
Andrea Winquist, Angela Werner

32



Page 184: Appendix B: Mapping and Spatiotemporal Methods

Geospatial Visualization and Analysis

Geographic information systems (GIS) can be useful for all stages of evaluating unusual patterns of
cancer. GIS may be used as part of proactive evaluation of cancer registry data and during Phase 2
assessments. Spatiotemporal regression and advanced spatial statistical methods are particularly useful
for identifying and quantifying the relationships between risk factors and cancer cases during
epidemiologic investigations (Phase 3). These processes are summarized in Figure 1.

Figure 1: GIS Activities Throughout the Examination of Unusual Patterns of Cancer and
Environmental Concerns

Proactive Further Epidemiologic
Evaluation & Assessment Studies
Routine

Monitoring pieseo

Mapping Spatial analysis Augmenting the

known/suspected of cancer map(s) with any

environmental case data additional data
hazards gathered

Geocoding
Cancer Data

Mapping risk Assessment of Complement the
Visualize SIR factors & trends through communication
populations spatiotemporal plan with
at risk analysis visualizations

___ Internal

Visualize Evaluation Use maps to

geographic area of risk factors communicate
of interest (spatial regression) results at
any stage

External

Visualization, or mapping, can be used as an important communication tool to both internal and
external stakeholders. As part of the routine evaluation of cancer data, maps can be shared with
partners in programs such as comprehensive cancer control and environmental health for decision
making. Additionally, maps can convey important information about the distribution of cases and
potential environmental risk factors when engaging with the community.

Often, a first step in visualization and spatial analysis involves translating addresses collected as text in
cancer registry data into coordinates that can be mapped. This process is known as geocoding, and the
quality of the result is crucial as it is the basis for visualizations and analyses. Resources are available

33



Page 185: that provide detailed descriptions of this process,°*°’ and tools are available at no cost for health
departments from the National Cancer Institute and the North American Association of Central Cancer
Registries (NAACCR) Geocoder.

Cancer registries and state health agencies typically have criteria related to release of data for small
geographic areas. Because of confidentiality and privacy concerns, some data cannot be released to the
public, unless these concerns are addressed. For example, a map of a small geographic area that
identifies the residences of cancer patients as points should not be made public.’ Similarly, many health
agencies are prohibited from publicly releasing a table for a small geographic area with a small
population, since each table cell might have only a few cases and could be used to identify individuals.

Once data are geocoded, they can be mapped along with other geographic data, such as suspected
environmental risk factors, for crude assessments of their proximity to the cases. Different spatial (e.g.,
census block, census tract, ZIP Code tabulation area, municipality, or county) or temporal scales (e.g.,
week, month, year, or several years) can be mapped to look for possible patterns. This practice is more
useful when longer periods of time are under study, as well as when there are larger numbers of cases
(e.g., >10 cases). Mapping and analyzing the data over space and time can help reveal whether changes
in incidence or mortality statistics are observed and may suggest risk factors that warrant further
consideration.

Varying the geographic scale or the geographic unit of aggregation can produce different patterns and
results. This is known as the modifiable areal unit problem,>*°? which has also been identified relative to
temporal aggregations. Multiple methods have been proposed to account for these issues;** © a
common solution is to use differing scales. In doing so, variations in results can be identified if they exist.
Further discussion of GIS visualization techniques and methods for the analysis of cancer data are
available in the published literature.°”*°

The following section provides basic information on the principles of clustering methods and statistical
considerations when working with spatially structured data. The National Cancer Institute (NCI) provides
a variety of methods and tools for analysis of cancer statistics. Some of the tools are more statistical in
nature, such as tools to calculate incidence and death rates and trends (available in SEER*Stat), while
other visualization and analysis tools are geospatially focused. Links to the tools and information for
further exploration are available at https://surveillance.cancer.gov/tools/. In addition to these freely
available tools, the sections below detail other spatial and statistical methods and software that can be
used for these analyses.

Spatial and Temporal Clusters

Spatial and temporal clusters can be detected by a variety of techniques that evaluate whether similar
features, values, or observations are “close” or in close proximity to one another. These techniques can
be divided into global, local, and focused methods. A table with methods and associated applications for
those categories is available in the Supplemental Information for Appendix B. The table is not meant to
be a comprehensive review of applications but rather to provide initial guidance.

Global clustering statistics can be used to determine if there are patterns of clustering anywhere in the
study area. Once clustering is deemed likely from global statistics, local clustering methods, including
scan statistics, can help to identify clusters within the area of interest. It is worth noting that it is
possible to detect statistically significant global clustering without evidence of local clustering and vice

34



Page 186: versa.© In cases where there is a known point-source, focused tests can be considered. Regression
analysis can then be used to understand the association between potential environmental risk factors
and cases or to adjust for confounding factors such as latency in cases, mobility, and demographic
variables (such as age and race). These methods are further described below, along with example use
cases and locations of available software for analysis.

Global Clustering Methods

Global clustering statistics detect patterns of spatial clustering that occur anywhere in a study area. They
do not identify where clusters occur, nor do they identify differences in spatial patterns within the area.
One measure of global clustering is spatial autocorrelation, which is the degree of similarity of nearby
features. Positive spatial autocorrelation means that features nearby one another have similar values,
while negative autocorrelation signifies nearby features that have dissimilar values.

Commonly used methods for testing global clustering are Geary’s C,°” Moran’s I,°° and the Oden’s Ipop,®°
which adjusts Moran’s | for differences in population. Global clustering can also be assessed using the K-
function (Ripley's) when point-level data are available.**’° GeoDa’ and R* packages are publicly
available, and several global statistics are available within other proprietary software packages, such as
ClusterSeer® * (BioMedware, Ann Arbor, MI), (see Supplemental Information for Appendix B).

Local Clustering Methods

Local clustering statistics, such as local indicators of spatial autocorrelation (LISA),’* identify the
locations of clusters or spatial outliers. Some global clustering statistics have local clustering statistic
counterparts such as global and local Moran’s | statistics and the Besag-Newell R.’” Another statistic,
Getis-Ord Gi*, identifies hot and cold spots based on where features with high (hot) or low (cold) values
are in close proximity to one another. The Getis-Ord Gi* provides estimates of statistical significance
while identifying the locations of hot and cold spots that are not confined to a specific shape.

Local versions of Moran's | and Geary's C are available for free within R* packages such as usdm and
spdep.”? Other programs also have Moran’s | statistics and the Getis-Ord Gi* statistic, such as ArcGIS™ *
tools (Esri, Redlands, CA), ClusterSEER®*, and GeoDa‘.”

Spatial scan statistics can be used to scan a study region using a series of moving windows with
increasing radii to identify areas where the observed cases included inside the window are greater than
expected. This method can be expanded to incorporate time as an added dimension, allowing a scan for
spatiotemporal clusters. To properly interpret the results of the spatial scan statistic, it is extremely
important to identify the appropriate radius for the spatial scan window to avoid clusters that are too
large or too small. Normally, the upper limit of the circle should not include more than 50 percent of the
dataset or the study area.*®’° Additional parameter selection, such as time range and spatial scale within
spatial scan statistics, can impact results.

One of the most popular scan statistics is Kulldorff’s scan statistic for spatial, temporal, and space-time
analysis,’©”’ freely available within SaTScan™ ‘software.’® The SaTScan™ * software includes analyses for
different data types including case counts,”’ rates,’° case/control data,’’ and even survival data.”
However, spatial and temporal clusters can appear in irregular shapes, which prompted Tango and
Takahashi®! to develop a flexible space-time scan statistic, implemented in the FlexScan* software. The
flexscan methodology is also available as an R* package, rflexscan. This package implements both
Kulldorff’s and Tango & Takahashi’s scan statistics.

35



Page 187: An alternative scan statistic is that proposed by Besag-Newell,®? which is useful for regional data with
small population sizes. It is available in the free software ClusterSeer® ‘ This test gives results for both
global and local clustering.

Focused Clustering Tests

A growing interest in recent years has been in the detection of clusters around a specific point-source,
such as a single identifiable source of air, water, thermal, noise, or light pollution.®* These focused tests
are usually designed to identify a particular spatial pattern of clustering around the point-source or
specific geographic location. The location of the point-source of interest needs to be identified prior to
the assessment, recognizing that different factors (meteorological, topographical, and others) can
influence the spatial pattern of potential exposures from the point-source.* The size, shape, and scale
of the analysis can also influence the results. For example, below are five focused cluster shapes and
corresponding fitted models that can be considered®:

1, Distance Decline (DD): A model where risk declines symmetrically in all directions with
distance from the point-source

2. Peaked Distance Decline (PDD): A model where risk peaks closest to the point-source and
then declines with distance

3. Direction (D): A model characterizing increased risk in a specific angle/direction from the
point-source

4. Distance Decline combined with Directional effect (DDIR)

5. Peaked Distance Decline combined with Directional effect (PDDIR)

Widely known focused cluster tests prove to have higher relative power for different models:

1. Lawson-Waller Score Test: This test provides robust results across different models. This
score test is powerful against small deviations from the null in the direction of a specific
alternative.®**°

2s Bithell's Linear Risk Score (LRS) Test: This is a distance version used for DD, PDD; direction
version used for D, DDIR, and PDDIR.®°

3. Cuzick and Edwards' Test: This test performs well for large sample sizes (N>500) and also
often used for PDD, DDIR, and PDDIR.®”

4. Stone's Maximum Likelihood Test: This is used for DD.®*

5: Tango's Focused Test: This is used for DD.®°

6. Besag and Newell's Test: This is used for PDD.®*

Regression Analyses

Regression methods provide analyses and a set of tools that are complementary to cluster detection
analysis. Regression analyses are commonly used in public health for two main reasons: 1) to predict an
outcome, and 2) to understand the association between at least two variables.°° For example, after
identifying spatial clusters of cancer cases, it may be useful to understand the relationship between
potential environmental exposures and the cancer of interest while controlling for demographic and
behavioral factors associated with increased risk.°2° Alternatively, it may be of interest to predict the

36



Page 188: risk of a specific cancer across a wide geographic region if there are data on known environmental
exposures.”

Special considerations must be made when applying regression techniques to spatially structured data.
Spatially structured data violate a key assumption of independence among observations due to inherent
autocorrelation, where a given value is to some degree predicted by the values of its neighbors.4293.4
General steps to overcome issues of spatial autocorrelation in regression, drawing primarily from Waller
& Gotway*? and Fotheringham & Rogerson”, can be found in the Supplemental Information for

Appendix B.

Comparison of Methods

The choice of a statistical cluster detection method should take into consideration the strengths and
weaknesses of the methods. Several criteria can be considered, such as the type of data (e.g., point-level
data or areal data), the ease of use and availability of data or software, the transparency of the methods
employed in a particular software, statistical power of the method to detect the cluster of interest, and
the desired output.®® Multiple comparisons of methods and reviews of techniques have been published
over the years,°”%961 and additional details and discussion can be found in the Supplemental
Information for Appendix B.

Summary

Cluster detection and other advanced spatial analysis methods are available via proprietary and free
applications. Such analysis often requires specialized knowledge about the data, appropriate use of the
methods, and careful interpretation of the results. Specifically, the choice of which models to use
depends on the type of data, the underlying assumptions based on the distribution of the data, and
geospatial considerations such as the size of the study area, spatial scale of the data, aggregation, and
masking. For example, results of analysis may greatly differ when implemented at the county or the
census tract level, and different models should be implemented if both case and area-level risk factors
are evaluated. Specific methods may also require additional considerations such as the type and size of
the spatial scan window.

The results of the GIS and spatiotemporal analysis can be used internally for decision making, can inform
actions, and can be used to communicate with the public. Therefore, collaborations with GIS
professionals and spatial statisticians equipped with specialized skills can help to ensure proper methods
are employed and interpretations of results are appropriate. If these experts are not available within the
health agency, consultation and technical assistance from CDC/ATSDR’s Geospatial Research Analysis
and Services Program (GRASP) can be requested by emailing CCGuidelines@cdc.gov.

* Software noted are examples of packages that are available freely or for purchase and do not represent
an endorsement of any specific product by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention or the
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry.

Additional Contributing Authors:
Liora Sahar, Marissa Grossman, Brian Lewis
ATSDR; Geospatial Research, Analysis, and Services Program

37



Page 189: Appendix C. List of Acronyms

aPOC: Agency point of contact

ASTHO: Association of State and Territorial Health Officials
ATSDR: Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
CAC: Community advisory committee

CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

CSTE: Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists
cPOC: Community point of contact

EHR: Electronic health records

GIS: Geographic information systems

GRASP: Geospatial Research, Analysis, and Services Program
NCEH: National Center for Environmental Health

PEHSU: Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit
SEHD: State Environmental Health Directors

SIR: Standardized incidence ratio

SMR: Standardized mortality ratio

STLT: State, tribal, local, and territorial

38



Page 190: References

4;

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Abrams B, Anderson H, Blackmore C, et al. Investigating suspected cancer clusters and
responding to community concerns: Guidelines from CDC and the council of State and Territorial
Epidemiologists. MMWR Recomm Reports. 2013;62(1).

Federal Register. Updating federal guidelines used by public health agencies to assess and
respond to potential cancer clusters in communities.
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/05/15/2019-09998/updating-federal-
guidelines-used-by-public-health-agencies-to-assess-and-respond-to-potential-
cancer?form=MY01SV&OCID=MYO1SV. Published 2019.

Murphy S, Kochanek K, Xu J, Arias E. Mortality in the United States, 2020. NCHS Data Brief.
2021;427. doi:https://dx.doi.org/10.15620/cdc:112079

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. An Update on Cancer Deaths in the United States.
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Division of Cancer Prevention and Control;
https://www.cdc.gov/cancer/dcpc/research/update-on-cancer-deaths/index.htm. Published
2022.

American Cancer Society. Lifetime Risk of Developing Cancer.
https://www.cancer.org/healthy/cancer-causes/general-info/lifetime-probability-of-developing-
or-dying-from-cancer.html. Published 2022.

National Institutes of Health - National Cancer Institute: SEER. Cancer Stat Facts: Cancer of Any
Site. https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/all.html. Published 2021. Accessed April 7, 2022.

Goodman M, Lakind JS, Fagliano JA, et al. Cancer cluster investigations: Review of the past and
proposals for the future. /nt J Environ Res Public Health. 2014;11(2):1479-1499.
doi:10.3390/ijerph110201479

CDC. World Trade Center Health Program. https://www.cdc.gov/wtc/pdfs/policies/WTCHP-
Minimum-Cancer-Latency-PP-01062015-508. pdf.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Risk Factors and Cancer.
https://www.cdc.gov/cancer/risk_factors.htm. Published 2022.

Thun MJ, Sinks T. Understanding cancer clusters. CA Cancer J Clin. 2004;54(5):273-280.
doi:10.3322/canjclin.54.5.273

Aldrich T, Sinks T. Things to know and do about cancer clusters. Cancer Invest. 2002;20:810-816.

Schottenfeld D, Fraumeni J, Samet J, Colditz G, Whittemore A. Cancer Epidemiology and
Prevention. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2006.

ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological profiles.
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiledocs/index.html.

Ma F, Lehnherr M, Fornoff J, Shen T. Childhood cancer incidence in proximity to nuclear power

39



Page 191: 15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

plants in Illinois. Arch Environ Occup Health. 2011;66(2):87-94.
doi:10.1080/19338244.2010.506497

Yaffee AQ, Scott B, Kaelin C, et al. Collaborative response to arsenic-contaminated soil in an
Appalachian Kentucky neighborhood. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2019;82(12):697-701.
doi:10.1080/15287394.2019.1641872

Jacqueline F Moreau, Jeanine M Buchanich, Jacob Z Geskin, Oleg E Akilov, Larisa J Geskin. Non-
random geographic distribution of patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma in the Greater
Pittsburgh Area - PubMed. Dermatol Online J. 2014;20(7).
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25046454/. Accessed January 7, 2022.

Messier KP, Serre ML. Lung and stomach cancer associations with groundwater radon in North
Carolina, USA. Int J Epidemiol. 2017;46(2):676-685. doi:10.1093/IJE/DYW128

Gallagher LG, Webster TF, Aschengrau A, Vieira VM. Using residential history and groundwater
modeling to examine drinking water exposure and breast cancer. Environ Health Perspect.
2010;118(6):749-755. doi:10.1289/EHP.0901547

Wheeler DC, Ward MH, Waller LA. Spatial-temporal Analysis of Cancer Risk in Epidemiologic
Studies with Residential Histories. Ann Assoc Am Geogr. 2012;102(5):1049-1057.
doi:10.1080/00045608.2012.671131

Fortunato L, Abellan JJ, Beale L, LeFevre S, Richardson S. Spatio-temporal patterns of bladder
cancer incidence in Utah (1973-2004) and their association with the presence of toxic release
inventory sites. Int J Health Geogr. 2011;10. doi:10.1186/1476-072X-10-16

Liu-Mares W, MacKinnon JA, Sherman R, et al. Pancreatic cancer clusters and arsenic-
contaminated drinking water wells in Florida. BMC Cancer. 2013;13. doi:10.1186/1471-2407-13-
111

Parikh PV, Wei Y. PAHs and PM2.5 emissions and female breast cancer incidence in metro Atlanta
and rural Georgia. Int J Environ Health Res. 2016;26(4):458-466.
doi:10.1080/09603123.2016.1161178

Levin RJ, De Simone NF, Slotkin JF, Henson BL. Incidence of thyroid cancer surrounding Three
Mile Island nuclear facility: the 30-year follow-up. Laryngoscope. 2013;123(8):2064-2071.
doi:10.1002/LARY.23953

PHNCI. The 10 Essential Public Health Services. https://phnci.org/uploads/resource-files/EPHS-
English.pdf. Published 2020.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 10 Essential Public Health Services.
https://www.cdc.gov/publichealthgateway/publichealthservices/essentialhealthservices.html.

New York State Cancer Registry. Cancer Data for New York State Counties.
https://www.health.ny.gov/statistics/cancer/registry/vol1.htm. Published 2021.

Massachusetts Environmental Public Health Tracking. Standardized Incidence Ratios for Cancer.

40



Page 192: 28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37:

38.

39.

40.

https://matracking.ehs.state.ma.us/Health-Data/Cancer/sirs.html#MyPopup. Published 2021.

Massachusetts Department of Public Health, Bureau of Environmental Health Assessment.
Explanation of a Standardized Incidence Ratio (SIR) and 95% Confidence Interval.
https://www.mass.gov/doc/appendix-a-explanation-of-a-standardized-incidence-ratio-sir-and-
95-confidence-interval-0/download#:~:text=Specifically%2C an SIR is the,comparison or “norma
population. Published 1998.

ia

Gordis L. Epidemiology. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014.

Merrill R. Environmental Epidemiology, Principles and Methods. Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett
Publishers, Inc.; 2008.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Environmental Public Health Tracking
Network Data Explorer. https://ephtracking.cdc.gov/DataExplorer/. Accessed April 22, 2022.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Superfund: National Priorities List (NPL).
https://www.epa.gov/superfund/superfund-national-priorities-list-npl. Published March 11,
2022. Accessed April 21, 2022.

CDC. National Vital Statistics System: Mortality Data.
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/deaths.htm. Published 2021.

American Cancer Society. Cancer Clusters. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/cancer-
causes/general-info/cancer-clusters.html. Published 2021.

Goodman M, Naiman JS, Goodman D, LaKind JS. Cancer clusters in the USA: What do the last
twenty years of state and federal investigations tell us? Crit Rev Toxicol. 2012;42(6):474-490.
doi:10.3109/10408444.2012.675315

Lanphear B, Buncher C. Latent period for malignant mesothelioma of occupational origin -
PubMed. J Occup Med. 1992;34(7):718-721. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1494965/.
Accessed January 7, 2022.

Urayama KY, Von Behren J, Reynolds P, Hertz A, Does M, Buffler PA. Factors associated with
residential mobility in children with leukemia: implications for assigning exposures. Ann
Epidemiol. 2009;19(11):834-840. doi:10.1016/J.ANNEPIDEM.2009.03.001

Dicker R, Coronado F, Koo D, Parrish R. Principles of Epidemiology in Public Health Practice: An
Introduction to Applied Epidemiology and Biostatics. CDC Office of Workforce and Career
Development; 2006.

Frost G. The latency period of mesothelioma among a cohort of British asbestos workers (1978—
2005). Br J Cancer. 2013;109(7):1965-1973. doi:10.1038/bjc.2013.514

Costas K, Knorr RS, Condon SK. A case-control study of childhood leukemia in Woburn,

Massachusetts: The relationship between leukemia incidence and exposure to public drinking
water. Sci Total Environ. 2002;300(1-3):23-35. doi:10.1016/S0048-9697(02)00169-9

41



Page 193: 41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51,

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

Massachusetts Department of Public Health. The Wilmington Childhood Cancer Study: An
Epidemiologic Investigation of Childhood Cancer from 1990-2000.; 2021.

Vieira VM, Hoffman K, Shin HM, Weinberg JM, Webster TF, Fletcher T. Perfluorooctanoic acid
exposure and cancer outcomes in a contaminated community: A geographic analysis. Environ
Health Perspect. 2013;121(3):318-323. doi:10.1289/ehp.1205829

Waller LA, Gotway CA. Applied Spatial Statistics for Public Health Data. New York : John Wiley
and Sons; 2004.

National Cancer Institute. Cancer Incidence Statistics.
https://surveillance.cancer.gov/statistics/types/incidence.html. Published April 15, 2021.
Accessed January 7, 2022.

Kelsey JL, Whittemore AS, Evans AS, Thompson WD. Methods in Observational Epidemiology. 2nd
ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1996.

Sahai H, Khurshid A. Statistics in Epidemiology: Methods, Techniques, and Applications. Boca
Raton: CRC; 1996.

Selvin S. Statistical Analysis of Epidemiologic Data. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1996.

Breslow NE, Day NE. Statistical methods in cancer research. Volume | - The analysis of case-
control studies. IARC Sci Publ. 1980;(32):5-338.

Rothman KJ, Greenland S, Lash TL. Modern Epidemiology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2008.

United Kingdom and Ireland Association of Cancer Registries. Standard Operating Procedure:
Investigating and Analysing Small-Area Cancer Clusters.

http://www.ukiacr.org/sites/ukiacr/files/file-. Published 2015.

Greenland S, Senn S, Rothman KJ, et al. Statistical tests, P values, confidence intervals, and
power: a guide to misinterpretations. Eur J Epidemiol. 2016;31(4):337-350.

Amrhein V, Greenland S, McShane B. Scientists rise up against statistical significance. Nature.
2019;567:305-307.

Pagano M, Gauvreau K. Principles of Biostatistics. 2nd ed. Pacific Grove, CA: Duxbury Thomson
Learning; 2000.

Rothman KJ. No Adjustments Are Needed for Multiple Comparisons. Vol 1.; 1990.

Goldberg DW, Swift JN, Wilson JP. Geocoding Best Practices: Reference Data, Input Data and
Feature Matching.

CDC. Geography and Locational Referencing Subgroup of the Standards and Network

Development Workgroup of the National Environmental Public Health Tracking Program.
Environmental Public Health Tracking Version 1.0 (A Resource for EPHT Managers and a Tool for

42



Page 194: 57.

58.

59;

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

Their Technical Staff).; 2005.

Sahar L, Foster SL, Sherman RL, et al. GIScience and cancer: State of the art and trends for cancer
surveillance and epidemiology. Cancer. 2019;125(15):2544-2560. doi:10.1002/cncr.32052

Gehlke CE, Biehl K. Certain Effects of Grouping upon the Size of the Correlation Coefficient in
Census Tract Material. J Am Stat Assoc. 1934;29(185A):169-170.
doi:10.1080/01621459.1934.10506247

Openshaw S, Taylor PJ. A million or so correlation coefficients: Three experiments on the
modifiable areal unit problem. Stat Appl Spat Sci. 1979:127-144.

Cheng T, Adepeju M. Modifiable Temporal Unit Problem (MTUP) and Its Effect on Space-Time
Cluster Detection. PLoS One. 2014;9(6):1-10. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0100465.g001

Wong DW. Modifiable Areal Unit Problem. /nt Encycl Hum Geogr. 2009.
Su MD, Lin M, Wen T. Spatial Mapping and Environmental Risk Identification.; 2011.
Yoo E-H. GIS Methods and Techniques. Compr Geogr Inf Syst. 2018.

Waller LA, Gotway CA. Applied Spatial Statistics for Public Health Data. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons, Inc.; 2004.

Cromley EK, McLafferty SL. G/S and Public Health. 2nd ed. New York, NY: The Guilford Press;
2012.

Huang L, Pickle LW, Das B. Evaluating spatial methods for investigating global clustering and
cluster detection of cancer cases. Stat Med. 2008;27(25):5111-5142. doi:10.1002/sim.3342

Geary RC. The contiguity ratio and statistical mapping. Inc Stat. 1954;5(3):115-146.
https://about.jstor.org/terms.

Moran PAP. Notes on continuous stochastic phenomena. Biometrika. 1950;37(1/2):17-23.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/2332142.

Oden N. Adjusting Moran’s | for population density. Stat Med. 1995;14(1):17-26.
Ripley BD. Spatial Statistics. New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons; 1981.
Anselin L. Local indicators of spatial association—LISA. Geogr Anal. 1995;27(2):93-115.

Costa MA, Assuncdo RM. A fair comparison between the spatial scan and the Besag—Newell
Disease clustering tests. Environ Ecol Stat. 2005;12(3):301-319.

Naimi B, Hamm NAS, Groen TA, Skidmore AK, Toxopeus AG. Where is positional uncertainty a
problem for species distribution modelling? Ecography (Cop). 2014;37(2):191-203.

Bivand RS, Wong DWS. Comparing implementations of global and local indicators of spatial
association. Test. 2018;27(3):716-748. doi:10.1007/s11749-018-0599-x

43



Page 195: 75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91,

Kulldorff M, Nagarwalla N. Spatial Disease Clusters: Detection and Inference. Vol 14.; 1995.
Kulldorff M. A spatial scan statistic. Commun Stat methods. 1997;26(6):1481-1496.

Kulldorff M, Heffernan R, Jacobs J, Martins A, Mostashari F. A Space-Time Permutation Scan
Statistic for Disease Outbreak Detection. PLoS Med. 2005;2:e59.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020059

Kulldorff M. Information management services, Inc. SaTScanTM v9. 2009;4.

Huang L, Tiwari RC, Zou Z, Kulldorff M, Feuer EJ. Weighted Normal Spatial Scan Statistic for
Heterogeneous Population Data. J Am Stat Assoc. 2009;104(487):886-898.
doi:10.1198/jasa.2009.ap07613

Huang L, Kulldorff M, Gregorio D. A spatial scan statistic for survival data. Biometrics.
2007;63(1):109-118.

Tango T, Takahashi K. A flexibly shaped spatial scan statistic for detecting clusters. Int J Health
Geogr. 2005;4(1):1-15.

Besag J, Newell J. The detection of clusters in rare diseases. J R Stat Soc Ser A (Statistics Soc.
1991;154(1):143-155.

Puett RC, Lawson AB, Clark AB, et al. Scale and shape issues in focused cluster power for count
data. Int J Health Geogr. 2005;4(1):1-16.

Lawson AB. Statistical Methods in Spatial Epidemiology. Wiley; 2006. doi:10.1093/ije/30.6.1504-a
Waller LA, Turnbull BW, Clark LC, Nasca P. Chronic disease surveillance and testing of clustering
of disease and exposure: Application to leukemia incidence and TCE-contaminated dumpsites in

upstate New York. Environmetrics. 1992;3(3):281-300.

Bithell JF. The choice of test for detecting raised disease risk near a point source. Stat Med.
1995;14(21-22):2309-2322.

Cuzick J, Edwards R. Methods for investigating localized clustering of disease. Clustering methods
based on k nearest neighbour distributions. IARC Sci Publ. 1996;(135):53-67.

Stone RA. Investigations of excess environmental risks around putative sources: statistical
problems and a proposed test. Stat Med. 1988;7(6):649-660.

Tango T. A class of tests for detecting ‘general’and ‘focused’clustering of rare diseases. Stat Med.
1995;14(21-22):2323-2334.

Kleinbaum DG, Kupper LL, Nizam A, Rosenberg ES. Applied Regression Analysis and Other
Multivariable Methods. 5th ed. Boston, MA, USA: Cengage Learning; 2013.

Cardoso D, Painho M, Roquette R. A geographically weighted regression approach to investigate
air pollution effect on lung cancer: A case study in Portugal. Geospat Heal. 2019;14(1).

44



Page 196: 92.

93.

94.

95;

96.

97,

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

doi:10.4081/gh.2019.701

Elliott P, Wartenberg D. Spatial epidemiology: current approaches and future challenges. Env
Heal Perspect. 2004;112(9):998-1006. doi:10.1289/ehp.6735

Fotheringham AS. “The Problem of Spatial Autocorrelation” and Local Spatial Statistics. Geogr
Anal. 2009;41(4):398-403. doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1538-4632.2009.00767.x

Legendre P. Spatial Autocorrelation: Trouble or New Paradigm? Ecology. 1993;74(6):1659-1673.
doi:https://doi.org/10.2307/1939924

Fotheringham AS, Rogerson PA. The SAGE handbook of spatial analysis. 2009:528.
doi:https://dx.doi.org/10.4135/9780857020130

Kulldorff M, Huang L, Pickle L, Duczmal L. An elliptic spatial scan statistic. Stat Med.
2006;25(22):3929-3943.

Lin H, Ning B, LiJ, et al. Lung cancer mortality among women in Xuan Wei, China: a comparison of
spatial clustering detection methods. Asia Pacific J Public Heal. 2015;27(2):NP392-NP401.

Hanson CE, Wieczorek WF. Alcohol mortality: a comparison of spatial clustering methods. Soc Sci
Med. 2002;55(5):791-802.

Kim J, Lee M, Jung |. A comparison of spatial pattern detection methods for major cancer
mortality in Korea. Asia Pacific J Public Heal. 2016;28(6):539-553.

Chen J, Roth RE, Naito AT, Lengerich EJ, MacEachren AM. Geovisual analytics to enhance spatial
scan statistic interpretation: an analysis of US cervical cancer mortality. Int J Health Geogr.

2008;7(1):1-18.

Kulldorff M, Song C, Gregorio D, Samociuk H, DeChello L. Cancer map patterns: are they random
or not? Am J Prev Med. 2006;30(2):S37-S49.

Jackson MC, Huang L, Luo J, Hachey M, Feuer E. Comparison of tests for spatial heterogeneity on
data with global clustering patterns and outliers. Int J Health Geogr. 2009;8(1):1-14.

Tango T. Spatial scan statistics can be dangerous. Stat Methods Med Res. 2021;30(1):75-86.

Goujon S, Kyrimi E, Faure L, et al. Spatial and temporal variations of childhood cancers: Literature
review and contribution of the French national registry. Cancer Med. 2018;7(10):5299-5314.

45



Page 197: 5/11/24, 2:07 PM Health Effects of Lead Exposure | Lead | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Home

Health Effects of Lead Exposure

Protecting children from exposure to lead is important to lifelong good health. No safe blood lead level in children has
been identified. Even low levels of lead in blood have been shown to negatively affect a child’s intelligence, ability to pay
attention, and academic achievement. While the effects of lead poisoning may be permanent, if caught early, there are
things parents can do BA [PDF - 234 KB] to prevent further exposure and reduce damage to their child's health.

Lead exposure occurs when a child comes in contact with lead by touching, swallowing, or breathing in lead or lead dust.

bo eS a

Exposure to lead can seriously harm a child's health and cause well-documented adverse effects such as:

e¢ Damage to the brain and nervous system
e Slowed growth and development
e Learning and behavior problems

e Hearing and speech problems
This can cause:

e Lower IQ
e Decreased ability to pay attention

e Underperformance in school
There is also evidence that childhood exposure to lead can cause long-term harm.

Lead exposure in children is often difficult to see. Most children have no obvious immediate symptoms. If there's
suspicion that a child may have been exposed to lead, parents should talk to their child’s healthcare provider about
getting a blood lead test. Healthcare providers and most local health departments can test for lead in the blood. Many
private insurance policies cover the cost of testing for lead in the blood. The cost of blood lead testing for children
enrolled in Medicaid is covered by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

The health effects of exposure are more harmful to children less than six years of age because their bodies are still

developing and growing rapidly. Young children also tend to put their hands or other objects, which may be contaminated
with lead dust, into their mouths, so they are more likely to be exposed to lead than older children.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/health-effects.htm



Page 198: 5/11/24, 2:07 PM Health Effects of Lead Exposure | Lead | CDC

Lead in the Blood and Body

Lead quickly enters the blood and can harm a child’s health. Once a child swallows lead, their blood lead level rises. Once
a child's exposure to lead stops, the amount of lead in the blood decreases gradually. The child’s body releases some of
the lead through urine, sweat, and feces. Lead is also stored in bones. It can take decades for lead stored in the bones to
decrease.

Many things affect how a child’s body handles exposure to lead, including the following:

e Child's age

e Nutritional status

e Source of lead exposure

e Length of time the child was exposed

e Presence of other underlying health conditions

Although lead in blood represents only a portion of the total amount of lead present in the body, a blood lead test is the
best way to assess a person’s exposure to lead.

Prevent Lead Exposure

The good news is that childhood lead exposure is preventable. The most important step that parents, healthcare
providers, and others can take is to prevent exposure.

CDC's Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention program is working across government programs to teach healthcare
providers, parents, educators, and others how to track developmental milestones in children under five who have
documented lead exposure—and how to act early if there is a concern.

Additional Resources

e CDC's developmental milestones - describes milestones children generally reach at each age, from 2 months - 5 years
old.

e CDC's Milestone Tracker app - available in English and Spanish, is a free tool to help you monitor your children’s
developmental progress.

e CDC's “Learn the Signs. Act Early” campaign - offers specific tools for families, healthcare providers, educators, home
visiting programs and others.

e HHS provides Birth to 5: Watch Me Thrive! A Compendium of Screening Measures for Young Children [4 - to support

early childhood practitioners in the choices they make when selecting or changing their developmental screening
tools.

Page last reviewed: September 2, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/health-effects.htm



Page 199: 5/11/24, 3:00 PM Health Studies - Disaster Epidemiology | CDC

i DC Centers for Disease
, Control and Prevention

Disaste

oP dee 2

r Epidemiology |

Disaster epidemiology assesses the short- and long-term adverse health effects of disasters to help guide emergency
response and recovery efforts and predict consequences of future disasters. It provides situational awareness; that is,

information that helps us understand what the needs are, plan the response, and gather the appropriate resources. The main
objectives of disaster epidemiology are to

¢ prevent or reduce the number of deaths, illnesses, and injuries caused by disasters,
e provide timely and accurate health information for decision-makers,

e improve prevention and mitigation strategies for future disasters by collecting information for future response
preparation.

NCEH provides expertise in morbidity and mortality surveillance, rapid needs assessments such as the Community
Assessment for Public Health Emergency Response (CASPER), and disaster epidemiologic studies. For more information on
disaster epidemiology and response, see the Frequently Asked Questions (FAQS).

National Center for Environmental Health

Overview of Disaster
Epidemiology

This short eLearning provides an overview of disaster epidemiology including the potential public health impacts of
disasters, difference between direct and indirect effects of a disaster, and the role of a disaster epidemiologist.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/disaster/epidemiology.htm



Page 200: 5/11/24, 3:00 PM Health Studies - Disaster Epidemiology | CDC

During a disaster, it is important to conduct morbidity and mortality surveillance to determine the extent and scope of
the health effects on the affected populations. Surveillance is the systematic collection, analysis, and interpretation of
death, injury, and illness data that enables public health to identify adverse health effects in the community. It allows us
to assess the human health impacts of a disaster and evaluate potential problems related to planning and prevention.

The Community Assessment for Public Health Emergency Response (CASPER) is a type of rapid needs assessment (RNA)
designed to provide public health leaders and emergency managers with household-based information about a
community. It is quick, reliable, relatively inexpensive, and flexible. CASPER uses valid statistical methods to gather
information and can be conducted throughout the disaster cycle (preparedness, response, recovery, mitigation) and in
non-disaster situations. The information generated can be used to initiate public health action; identify information gaps;
facilitate disaster planning, response, and recovery activities; allocate resources; and assess new or changing needs in the
community.

Public health disaster studies helps identify associations between disaster-related exposures and mortality or morbidity.
It can also help evaluate specific programs or response techniques to yield decisions and assess the successfulness of the
program or response. NCEH conducts epidemiologic studies and research on various disaster-related topics. Our SMEs
also provide technical assistance to partners in conducting their own research.

The Disaster Epidemiology Community of Practice (DECoP)external icon 4 is a collaborative group of CDC; other federal;
state, tribal, local, and territorial (STLT); educational; and other partners established to provide technical resources,
expand the use of disaster epidemiology tools, and evaluate tools and guidelines to improve situational awareness and
response activities. The DECoP hosts quarterly webinars and has developed a SharePoint site designed to be a “one-stop-
shop” for all things disaster epidemiology related. For more information on DECoP, how to join, or to gain access to the
SharePoint, email DECoP@cdc.gov

Page last reviewed: September 23, 2019

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/disaster/epidemiology.htm



Page 201: 5/11/24, 3:02 PM Health Studies Program - Chemical Exposures - Poison Center and Public Health Collaborations Community of Practice (CoP) | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

DC Centers for Disease —
WH 2 4A Control and Prevention

Health Studies - Understanding Chemical and Radiation Exposures Home

Poison Center and Public Health Collaborations
Community of Practice

About

The Poison Center and Public Health Collaborations Community of Practice (PCPH CoP) was created in 2010 by the Council of
State and Territorial Epidemiologists (CSTE), America’s Poison Centers [4 and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) to facilitate better collaboration between federal, state, and local public health agencies and poison centers.

Data collected by the nation’s poison centers [4 are an important tool for all-hazards exposure and illness surveillance. Close

collaboration and open communication among public health partners and poison centers are necessary to leverage poison
center data for public health surveillance.

PCPH CoP Mission:

To facilitate better collaboration between federal, state, and local health agencies and poison centers through sharing
ideas and best practices to enhance disease surveillance.

The primary goals of the PCPH CoP are the following:

e Build knowledge on public health and toxicology topics.

e Develop and formulate best practices for poison center and public health collaboration.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/chemicals/poison_center.htm



Page 202: 5/11/24, 3:02 PM Health Studies Program - Chemical Exposures - Poison Center and Public Health Collaborations Community of Practice (CoP) | CDC

Activities
ES ©
Or
p__N
Qi),
Webinars

The PCPH CoP hosts a quarterly webinar series featuring various topics and activities from around the country. Past webinar

topics include cannabinoid-associated coagulopathy; lead surveillance; wildfires, climate change, and poison control; harmful
algal blooms; pesticide poisonings; and others.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/chemicals/poison_center.htm 2/4



Page 203: 5/11/24, 3:02 PM Health Studies Program - Chemical Exposures - Poison Center and Public Health Collaborations Community of Practice (CoP) | CDC

Newsletters

CDC develops and releases a newsletter for the PCPH CoP several times a year, featuring select topics and resources relevant
to members. Newsletters are available to view online.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/chemicals/poison_center.htm 3/4



Page 204: 5/11/24, 3:02 PM Health Studies Program - Chemical Exposures - Poison Center and Public Health Collaborations Community of Practice (CoP) | CDC

K£<S8

Special Projects
Assessment of the Collaboration between Health Departments and Poison Centers

In 2012, the PCPH CoP launched a special project to better characterize current collaboration and barriers to collaboration
between poison centers and state and local health departments. The results of this evaluation illustrated the wide spectrum
of collaboration and partnerships that exist between poison centers and health departments across the country. Read more
in the report BR [PDF - 1,679 KB].

Join the PCPH CoP

PCPH CoP membership consists of more than 250 public health and poison control professionals from across the country.
Members of the PCPH CoP include

e Poison center professionals,

e Public health professionals at state, tribal, local, and territorial health departments,
e First responders,

e Emergency managers, and

e Medical professionals.

To become a member, contact PCPHCoP@cdc.gov.

e National Chemical and Radiological Surveillance Program

e America’s Poison Centers [4

Last Reviewed: November 9, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/chemicals/poison_center.htm

44



Page 205: 5/11/24, 3:03 PM Health Studies: About the Program | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

W724 Centers for Disease
4 Control and Prevention

Health Studies Home

About the Program

CDC's Health Studies Program (HSP) conducts rapid epidemiologic investigations in response to outbreaks believed to have
environmental causes and responds to environmental disasters. The program also conducts extended research studies to
define the relationship between human health and environmental exposures. When requested, HSP provides technical
assistance and expertise related to environmental and disaster epidemiology to state, tribal, local, territorial, and
international public health agencies. Recommendations based on the results of the HSP’s work have been incorporated into
public health strategies to prevent or reduce harmful environmental exposures.

75 Wi :

£
: Sa

Mission

HSP's mission is to assess the extent of human exposures to emerging environmental threats and identify adverse health
effects associated with the environmental exposures.

Goal

To turn knowledge gained from applied environmental epidemiology and surveillance practices into products that guide
public health decision-making.

The HSP accomplishes this goal by

e collecting, analyzing, and interpreting exposure and health data,
e providing technical assistance for disaster preparedness and response, and

e developing an expert workforce.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/about.htm



Page 206: 5/11/24, 3:03 PM Health Studies: About the Program | CDC

Last Reviewed: August 10, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/about.htm 2/2



Page 207: 5/11/24, 4:04 PM Heart Disease & Stroke | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

CDC Centers for Disease —
betes Control and Prevention

Heart Disease & Stroke

Updated September 28, 2021

We Track That

The Tracking Network uses data from the U.S. Census Bureau [4, hospital and emergency department databases provided by
state and/or local health departments, and death certificates from the National Center for Health Statistics to calculate state
and local data about heart disease. Estimates of prevalence of heart attacks and ischemic heart disease are largely based on
survey samples (e.g., National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey and National Ambulatory Care Survey) or large cohort
studies such as the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study.

Stroke systems of care data come from state and DC statutes, regulations and legislation collected through WestlawNext [4
to analyze pre-hospital and in-hospital care which have been proposed to improve access to time-sensitive, lifesaving
treatments for stroke. Certified stroke center data were obtained directly from The Joint Commission [4, the Det Norske
Veritas, and via Healthcare Facilities Accreditation Program (HFAP) certification data.

Types of Data

These indicators provide information about health effects due to heart disease and stroke systems of care that informed
policy interventions. These data will allow for monitoring of trends over time and have the potential to identify high risk
groups not reflected in current national data. These data may also inform prevention, evaluation, program planning efforts,
and policy interventions.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/HeartDisease.htm



Page 208: 5/11/24, 4:04 PM Heart Disease & Stroke | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Heart Attack and Stroke Hospitalizations

These indicators estimate the number and rate of people who were admitted to the hospital due to heart attack or
stroke. They can be used to identify trends and patterns in hospitalizations due to heart attacks or strokes. They can also
be used to help estimate the number of hospital admissions for either heart attacks or strokes. These data come from
hospitals, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services [4,, and CDC's Atlas of Heart Disease and Stroke.

Mortality from Heart Attack, Ischemic Heart Disease, and Stroke

These indicators used data collected by vital records from CDC's National Center for Health Statistics and CDC's Atlas of
Heart Disease and Stroke. Data can be used to identify trends and patterns in the mortality of ischemic heart disease,
heart attacks, or stroke.

Heart Disease Mortality
This indicator includes vital records data from CDC's National Center for Health Statistics. This data can be used to
identify trends in the mortality of heart disease (heart attack, coronary heart disease).

Coronary Heart Disease and Stroke Prevalence

These indicators include data on the crude and age-adjusted rate of coronary heart disease and the prevalence of adults
ever diagnosed with stroke. These data can be used to identify patterns and monitor trends over time, conduct further
analysis by linking with other data, and enhance prevention, education, and evaluation efforts. Dataare collected from
the Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (BRFSS), the 2010 Census population, and from CDC's Population Level
Analysis and Community Estimates (PLACES) Project.

Stroke Systems of Care

Stroke systems of care policies addressing prehospital and in-hospital care have been proposed to improve access to
time-sensitive, lifesaving treatments for stroke. Policy surveillance of stroke systems of care laws supported by best
available evidence can reveal potential strengths and weaknesses in how stroke care delivery is regulated across the
nation. These data include:

e Stroke Systems of Care: Pre-hospital Policy Interventions
e Stroke Systems of Care: In-hospital Policy Interventions

e Stroke Systems of Care: Legal Authorities and Organizational Framework

Data Highlight

1d ALLEY DARE
AGH [ity OR Ba

Proa (Fel 1) 578.1824

Add points of interest to any map.
Click on the gear icon to view options, like hospitals, public schools, nursing homes, day cares, and more.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/HeartDisease.htm



Page 209: 5/11/24, 4:04 PM Heart Disease & Stroke | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Data in Action

Tracking heart disease and stroke systems of care will help with:

e examination of time trends;

e identification of any seasonal patterns;

e assessment of geographic differences;

e evaluation of differences in heart disease by age, gender, and race/ethnicity;
e determination of populations in need of targeted interventions;

e determination of changes in law over time;

e determination of when select states and DC stroke systems of care policy interventions became effective, sunset, or
repealed between 1999 and 2018;

e planning for a state stroke policy that addresses multiple evidence-informed policy interventions to improve stroke care;
e driving development or implementation of state stroke systems of care laws and policy; and

e identifying gaps in how state law integrates stroke system care policies that warrant further study.

Learn More

e Heart Disease
e CDC's Division for Heart Disease and Stroke Prevention
e Heart Disease Quiz

e Learn About Stroke

Tracking Resources

e Heart Health Infographic FA

Related Content Areas
e Air Quality
* COPD

e Lifestyle Risk Factors

Data Explorer

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/HeartDisease.htm

3/5



Page 210: 5/11/24, 4:04 PM

x

Heart Disease & Stroke | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

larger” feceg & i eee
rem
Ce ee
denna Payee oe ed
dae Pee are Bes
fale ee oe oe ey Gadel
jared es Be

Gade Poe oe ee ey Bs has.

Aik Pee ees

dees Pyare pr Bees

date Pe ere are eis

et ee
Ceci

ve yee ee

View data in simple charts

Peed
Dr oe ed

bem pe wk
Pe ceed tol ech
Poarcerl col wciaiis

filed = a

iar oe a
aa”) a

—

ce

ES

FE Ae eS

E SER SS oe Po SS

fins. we. Eee: Dad &

me be ec 0 ed ee

Be a all

rt 2b ee ee eed eee el ee
el ely 2 ei 2 ies La 2 ee er el
OP Br ee waeig Tsai ss Ha UE ss Ee a PS

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/HeartDisease.htm

45



Page 211: 5/11/24, 4:04 PM

API

Heart Disease & Stroke | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: September 28, 2021

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/HeartDisease.htm

5/5



Page 212: 5/11/24, 4:13 PM Heat & Heat-related Illness | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

za Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

National Environmental Public Health Tracking

Heat & Heat-related Illness

As a result of the changing climate, serious weather events, like heat waves, happen more often. These changes have the

potential to affect human health in several direct and indirect ways, some of them severe.
f J

We Track That

We partner with the Climate and Health Program to host data from several sources to track the effects of climate change and
help communities respond. The Tracking Network also collects data on heat-related illnesses throughout the United States
and provides information so people can protect themselves. Knowing how to prepare for and respond to extreme heat events
will help protect our communities, especially the most vulnerable populations.

Types of Data

The Tracking Network provides data about extreme heat, heat-related health effects, and the vulnerabilities that increase risk
for health effects related to those events.

Extreme Heat

¢ Temperature and Heat Projections
This indicator allows you to use modeled county-level data to look at projections of extreme daytime and nighttime
temperatures to better understand how our climate is changing. These data can be used to understand trends in heat
over time and focus preparedness plans to lessen the health effects of extreme heat.

e Historical Temperature and Heat Index
This indicator allows you to look at temperature, heat index, and number of days to define extremely hot days and
extreme heat events using modeled data by county and census tract during May-
September of each year.

Heat-related Illness

e Heat -related Emergency Department Visits * 4
This indicator estimates the number and rate of emergency department visits for heat stress. It includes all cases
where heat stress is listed as a primary or other diagnosis.

¢ Heat -related Hospitalizations * 4
This indicator estimates the number and rate of hospitalizations for heat stress. It includes all cases where heat stress

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Heat.htm



Page 213: 5/11/24, 4:13 PM Heat & Heat-related Illness | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

is listed as a primary or other diagnosis.

e Heat-related Mortality
This indicator is based on data from death certificates to evaluate deaths that have identified heat as an underlying or

contributing cause.

Heat Vulnerability & Preparedness

e Heat Vulnerability & Preparedness
This indicator includes measures that may make people at greater risk for heat-related health effects. These measures

are diabetes, heart disease, poverty, race, advanced age, social isolation, disabilities, population density, forest
canopy, developed land use, and cultivated crop land use.

* These data come from hospital records and may not capture the full range of heat-related illness if exposure to excess heat is not explicitly documented. These data can be used to

document changes over place and time, monitor vulnerable areas, and evaluate the results of local climate-adaptation strategies.

4 These data are supplied by health departments funded by the CDC Tracking Program.

Data Highlight

& Health Tracker

Ri ee ee ee Begs ll Pe Ol Sen Seattle WE Satis abe!) ein Weal
‘y if agg a . Plo! 2) Pa ec ee aay: el a pe Pee ae

ee ey A) Pale oe!) Bal eee Gia! ara ee BM ize
es es PS ee es ee eee ee ee eee ee
Cimeat Rae are GR ay ee

Health “=~

Progra . — he
TRACKING

CDC's Heat and Health Tracker:
Explore how extreme heat affects your county, populations that are at risk, and resources for response.

Data in Action

Reviewing these national data helps scientists make comparisons between environmental conditions and health problems.
Specifically, uses of extreme heat data include:

e Identifying conditions that make people vulnerable during extreme weather events
e Better understanding the possible health effects and risks to specific groups of people, particularly for heat-associated
death

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Heat.htm 2/5



Page 214: 5/11/24, 4:13 PM Heat & Heat-related Illness | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

e Evaluating extreme weather events at the national level, while allowing for comparisons across states
¢ Gaining a better understanding of trends in heat-related illness and deaths over time
¢ Comparing health trends among states and counties to plan interventions

e Designing interventions and communication efforts for at-risk populations.

Read these success stories to learn about the heat stress illness related work happening in our funded Tracking Programs.

California | Minnesota | Missouri | New Hampshire | New York City

Learn More

e Climate and Health Program
e Extreme Heat Adaptation

e Extreme Heat and Your Health

Tracking Resources

¢ Climate Change and Extreme Heat Infographic FA

e Heat Stress Illness Hospitalizations - Environmental Public Health Tracking Program, 20 States, 2001-2010, MMWR.
December 12, 2014 / 63(SS13);1-10.

e Heat & Health Tracker

e Making Missouri Cooling Centers Easier to Find (video)
Related Content Areas

e Drought

e Precipitation & Flooding

e Sunlight & UV

Data Explorer

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Heat.htm

3/5



Page 215: 5/11/24, 4:13 PM

x

Heat & Heat-related Illness | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

larger” feceg & i eee
rem
Ce ee
denna Payee oe ed
dae Pee are Bes
fale ee oe oe ey Gadel
jared es Be

Gade Poe oe ee ey Bs has.

Aik Pee ees

dees Pyare pr Bees

date Pe ere are eis

et ee
Ceci

ve yee ee

View data in simple charts

Peed
Dr oe ed

bem pe wk
Pe ceed tol ech
Poarcerl col wciaiis

filed = a

iar oe a
aa”) a

—

ce

ES

FE Ae eS

E SER SS oe Po SS

fins. we. Eee: Dad &

me be ec 0 ed ee

Be a all

rt 2b ee ee eed eee el ee
el ely 2 ei 2 ies La 2 ee er el
OP Br ee waeig Tsai ss Ha UE ss Ee a PS

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Heat.htm

45



Page 216: 5/11/24, 4:13 PM

API

Heat & Heat-related Illness | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Heat.htm

5/5



Page 217: 5/11/24, 4:13 PM Hormone Disorders | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Hormone Disorders

—_ prad!

We Track That

Tracking hormone levels in populations provides information on trends and changes of these levels over time. This
information may help identify potential causes for hormone level changes in populations, including exposure to
environmental chemicals that can affect the endocrine system. Some of the endocrine disrupting chemicals found in the
environment include certain pesticides, and industrial chemicals, such as perchlorate, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and
perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS).

Types of Data

Data on thyroid hormone function on the Tracking Network comes from CDC's National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES). NHANES is an ongoing, complex survey that samples the U.S population. It collects different types of
information to provide an assessment of the population's overall health and nutrition. The data in each measure are derived
from urine and blood samples from people who are typical examples of the U.S. population. The data are available for the
United States as a whole, not by county, state, or region.

Population Thyroid Hormone Levels
This indicator shows concentrations of different thyroid hormones in blood, including thyroxine (T,), triiodothyronine (Ts),
and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). This indicator also shows concentrations of iodine in urine.

Some limitations of the data and measures on the Tracking Network are:

e The measures cannot be used to provide population reference levels or trends over time for thyroid in children
younger than 12 years, as NHANES did not measure thyroid hormones in children younger than 12 years.

e The measures cannot be used to provide population reference levels or trends over time for thyroid hormones or
urinary iodine in pregnant women as not enough pregnant women were sampled to produce population-based
estimates of thyroid hormones or urinary iodine for pregnant women.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/HormoneDisorders.htm



Page 218: 5/11/24, 4:13 PM Hormone Disorders | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Data Highlight

| | G aia

es PS ES | Pe a | ee ee) ee a

Add layers to any map.
Click on the gear icon to select layers: surface smoke, current radar, transportation noise, active Atlantic cyclones. Try it!

Data in Action

Data available on the Tracking Network on thyroid hormone function can be used to:

e Provide reference levels of thyroid hormone levels in the US population
e Provide trends over time of thyroid hormone levels in the US population

e Provide information on adequacy of iodine levels in US population and inform interventions for iodine inadequacy (e.g.,
requirements for supplements)

e Provide trends of urinary iodine levels over time in the US populations

Learn More

e NIH - Endocrine Disruptors 4
e ASTDR - Endocrine Disruptors: PFAS
e Perchlorate

e Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs)

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/HormoneDisorders.htm

2/4



Page 219: 5/11/24, 4:13 PM

e Hyperthyroidism, National Institutes of Health 4

e Hypothyroidism, National Institutes of Health 4

Related Content Areas
e Reproductive and Birth Outcomes

e¢ Developmental Disabilities
e Birth Defects

e Toxic Substances Releases
e Pesticide Exposure

e Drinking Water

Explore Hormone Disorders Data

Data Explorer

x

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/HormoneDisorders.htm

Hormone Disorders | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

3/4



Page 220: 5/11/24, 4:13 PM

Gorter fee 6 dal eee
ree
cd eile ee cs Bb

Cas

Cnicey

Hormone Disorders | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

mam TH

Pep mee an pees ape ead eee a a

Rater of ec ee ee ee eee. eed oe!

Pace col acheter ier edo. ic eee Sere be ne Bae) ee |
Per ee el ee ee ed eS a ees eee eee ee ee eT ad
Peco cd Mech ea eSB AH ee a ed Tn +

fe OE We Bo ee Be Dl

emcee RL eM cm a Ey A Rd rl AD ad wt +

Prard cf ca a ee i ee)
aT”

Pec aches. i ei ee oe ee oie Ook cel or. en eed ev 1! arc
oe

Wier hcl i in hPa ded el sa LT ri

Par ot on ae ee ee

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/HormoneDisorders.htm

44



Page 221: 5/11/24, 2:32 PM Illness Prevention Infographic | Vessel Sanitation Program | CDC

CD ay Centers for Disease
», C Control and Prevention

Vessel Sanitation Program

Illness Prevention Infographic

Seeaeseeeaeanaaaa

Help Limit the Spread of Acute Gastroenteritis
Report your illness if you're sick.
(> * Call the ship’s medical facility as soon as possible
and follow the medical staff's recommendations.

Wash your hands often, especially after
using the toilet and before eating or drinking. #&

a Take care of yourself.
Sam, * Get plenty of rest and drink plenty of water.
° Resting helps rebuild your immune system.
2 Drinking water helps prevent dehydration.

(vomiting or diarrhea).
* Report it to cruise staff if they are not already aware.

Leave the area if you see someone get sick f

Help limit the spread of acute gastroenteritis

Report your illness if you're sick.

¢ Call the ship's medical facility as soon as possible and follow the medical staff's recommendations.

Wash your hands often, especially after using the toilet and before eating or drinking.
Take care of yourself.

¢ Get plenty of rest and drink plenty of water.
© Resting helps rebuild your immune system.

© Drinking water helps prevent dehydration.
Leave the area if you see someone get sick (vomiting or diarrhea).

e Report it to cruise staff if they are not already aware.
Page last reviewed: October 4, 2021

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/prevention-infographic.htm

11



Page 222: 5/11/24, 2:25 PM Inspection Infographic | Vessel Sanitation Program | CDC

CDC Centers for Disease _
2° Control and Prevention

Vessel Sanitation Program Home

Inspection Infographic

Download our infographic showing the eight areas VSP inspects on cruise ships.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/inspection-infographic.htm

Espafiol | Other Languages

115



Page 223: 5/11/24, 2:25 PM Inspection Infographic | Vessel Sanitation Program | CDC

VESSEL SANITATION PROGRAM

KEEPING YOU 2202774
ONTHE HIGH SEAS

VSP conducts health to find out how well
cruise ships meet od spats in re ecane Manual. Maintaining
high public health standards can help to prevent large numbers of passengers and
crew members getting sick with certain illnesses that cause diarrhea or vomiting.

Depending on
ship size, one to
four inspectors
conduct these
inspections.

Inspectors
evaluate eight
specific areas
on ships.

REVIEW INTERVIEW

+ medical documents about + medical staff, to ensure they know
people who said they had about VSP procedures for managing
diarrhea or vomiting people who have diarrhea or are vomiting

+ medical center + crew members, to ensure they are well
LD supplies for required trained in VSP requirements
\ specimen collection specific to their job and that
———_ containers and no crew members are

shipping containers working while they have
diarrhea or are vomiting.

@ —_—- REVIEW charts and logs to see that halogen

ay and pH levels have been correct since the
—_——

DO a spot-check inspection of some areas of
the ship to ensure that the drinking water
system is protected. 4

é TAKE water samples to make sure chlorine
and pH levels are correct

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/inspection-infographic.htm 2/5



Page 224: 5/11/24, 2:25 PM Inspection Infographic | Vessel Sanitation Program | CDC

aw, ————l
ENSURE that food is being stored, CHECK that dishwashers and other
prepared, and served safely. galley equipment are well maintained
and in good working order.

INTERVIEW food service employees LOOK at employees’ health

to make sure they know safe food and personal hygiene.
handling practices

SWIMMING POOLS & WHIRLPOOLS:

Review, Sample, and Interview
GOD

Fl |Z th

REVIEW charts andlogs {|

to make sure that the | TAKE water samples to
cruise ship has followed ensure chlorine and pH
the rules ofthe current | levels are correct

VSP Operations Manual

Veen

INTERVIEW staff to ensure
+ they know the ship's

procedure for accidents

involving feces or vomit.

HOUSEKEEPING: Meet and Discuss

Meet with the housekeeping manager to review the outbreak
prevention and management procedures, including the
Outbreak Prevention and Response Plan.

ENSURE the housekeeping manager is well informed about
= + general disinfection of public areas

+ measures to prevent the spread of disease

+ how to respond in case of a rise in the number of people
getting sick with diarrhea or vomiting, or to an outbreak.

PEST AND INSECT MANAGEMENT: OS)

Interview and Review

INTERVIEW the environmental \ ENSURE that staffis
health officer or the person in well informed about
charge of the plan to manage how to manage

pests on the ship. pests on the ship.

= CHILD ACTIVITY CENTERS:

Observe, Review, and Interview

MAKE SURE child centers are ENSURE that the >)
properly equipped with: toys are clean.
+a place for diaper changing

ie]
* toilets 2. _ ENSURE staff knows what to
+a place for hand washing : = dowhen children are sick
_.@i® with diarrhea or vomiting.

HEATING, VENTILATION, AND
AIR CONDITIONING (HVAC): inspect

—— INSPECT air conditioning/heating
and ventilation rooms to ensure that
+ water is not collecting inside the units
+ units are clean

www.cde.gov/nceh/vsp

Vessel Sanitation Program: Keeping You Healthy on the High Seas

VSP conducts public health inspections to find out how well cruise ships meet health standards in the VSP Operations Manual.
Maintaining high public health standards can help to prevent large numbers of passengers and crew members getting sick
with certain illnesses that cause diarrhea or vomiting.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/inspection-infographic.htm 3/5



Page 225: 5/11/24, 2:25 PM Inspection Infographic | Vessel Sanitation Program | CDC

Depending on ship size, one to four inspectors conduct these inspections. Inspectors evaluate eight specific areas on ships.

Medical Center: Review and Interview

Review

e Medical documents about people who said they had diarrhea or vomiting.

e Medical center supplies for required specimen containers and shipping containers.
Interview

e Medical staff, to ensure they know about VSP procedures for managing people who have diarrhea or are vomiting.

e¢ Crew members, to ensure they are well trained in VSP requirements specific to their job and that no crew members are
working while they have diarrhea or are vomiting.

Potable Water Systems: Review and Sample

Review charts and logs to see that halogen and pH levels have been correct since the last inspection.
Do a spot-check inspection of some areas of the ship to ensure that the drinking water system is protected.

Take water samples to make sure chlorine and pH levels are correct.

Galleys and Dining Rooms: Review, Observe, and Interview

Ensure that food is being stored, prepared, and served safely.
Check that dishwashers and other galley equipment are well maintained and in good working order.
Interview food service employees to make sure they know safe food handling practices.

Look at employees’ health and personal hygiene.

Swimming Pools and Whirlpools: Review, Sample, and Interview

Review charts and logs to make sure that the cruise ship has followed the rules of the current VSP Operations Manual.
Take water samples to ensure chlorine and pH levels are correct.

Interview staff to ensure they know the ship's procedure for accidents involving feces or vomit.

Housekeeping: Meet and Discuss

Meet with the housekeeping manager to review the outbreak prevention and management procedures, including the
Outbreak Prevention and Response Plan.

Ensure the housekeeping manager is well informed about

e General disinfection of public areas.
e Measures to prevent the spread of disease.

e How to respond in case of a rise in the number of people getting sick with diarrhea or vomiting, or to an outbreak.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/inspection-infographic.htm AI5



Page 226: 5/11/24, 2:25 PM Inspection Infographic | Vessel Sanitation Program | CDC

Pest and Insect Management: Interview and Review

Interview the environmental health officer or the person in charge of the plan to manage pests on the ship.

Ensure that staff is well informed about how to manage pests on the ship.

Child Activity Centers: Observe, Review, and Interview

Make sure child centers are properly equipped with

e Aplace for diaper changing.
¢ Toilets.

e Aplace for hand washing.
Ensure that the toys are clean.

Ensure staff knows what to do when children are sick with diarrhea or vomiting.

Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC): Inspect

Inspect air conditioning/heating and ventilation rooms to ensure that

e Water is not collecting inside the units.

e Units are clean.
Last Reviewed: October 6, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/inspection-infographic.htm



Page 227: Suggested citation: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Integrated pest management: conducting urban
rodent surveys. Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human Services; 2006.

Use of trade names is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, the Public Health Service, or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.



Page 228: Contents
Tmtroduction......ccccccsccscsscsscsessesccscesesecsecscsecsscsecsessessssesecsesesscsecsesaesessessesscseesecaesscascaesaesesseesesaesecseesesecsecseeeenees 1
IPM Basics

Definition and Philosophy

Program Components

Characteristics of Urban Rodent Surveys
Basic Units in the Operational Program

Sample Verstis Comprehensive SURES wcssscnnemmisnonmnmnnmannnnnnmanm

Personnel Requirements

Survey Procedures
Sample: Survey Methodology sssscsswssssssrasnunenconrennveienmummm enn va srarienmneremnenrrenmmmmernnnnnses 5

Survey Crews and Equipment
Premises Inspection—Exterior
Premises Inspection—Interior

Instructions for Completing the Block Record (Exterior Inspection) Form....
Premises Address
Premises Type
Premises Details

Harborage..
Entry and Access
Active Signs
Remarks
Interior Inspection Using a Modified Block Record (Exterior Inspection) Form ........ssceesseseseseeseseseeeeseeees 14

Premises Type
Premises Details

Harborage
Entry and Access
Active Signs ..
Remarks
GIS and Mapping

Interior Tolerance Limits.
Selected References 18
Appenidic.A Survey Roms tenses ee 19

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys



Page 229: Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

ii



Page 230: This manual is for classroom use and for field

training of program managers, environmental health
practitioners, inspectors, outreach workers, and others
who work in community-based rodent integrated pest
management programs. The manual is also a reference
for survey techniques and for the preparation of reports
and maps.

Introduction

For centuries, people have recognized that rats and
mice are not only a nuisance but are a public health
problem. Rats and mice damage and contaminate food,
damage structures, and carry diseases that threaten
health and quality of life, and they can cause injury
and death. This manual describes techniques to help

us protect ourselves from these disease vectors by
gathering information (surveillance) about infestations
and about the causative conditions of infestation.
Accurate recordkeeping by public health officials
provides the information needed to manage rodent and
other pest problems.

Urban rodent surveys of exterior areas are the primary
means for obtaining information on rodent infestations
and on premises with environmental health deficiencies
that support commensal rodent populations in

housing and on premisess. Survey areas should include
residential, commercial, and civic buildings; vacant lots;
and public areas. The rodent species primarily targeted
in surveys are the Norway rat (Rattus norvegicus), roof
rat (Rattus rattus), and house mouse (Mus musculus).

Urban rodent surveys, as well as surveys for other pests,
fulfill an essential surveillance requirement for every
integrated pest management (IPM) program, which is
the need for detailed information about conditions in
a defined community. IPM is a long-term, effective,
and holistic approach to managing pests of all kinds

by carefully combining various interventions (e.g.,
education, code enforcement, rodent proofing,
poisoning) in ways that minimize environmental
hazards and deficiencies that affect people’s health.

The focus of this manual is on how to conduct a
survey, although the other IPM components are
covered briefly to establish their link to the survey. This
manual is for classroom use and for the field training of
program managers, environmental health practitioners,
outreach workers, inspectors, and others who work in
community-based rodent IPM programs.

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

This manual is also a reference on survey techniques
and on the preparation of reports and maps.

IPM Basics

Definition and Philosophy

IPM requires a shift from the typical pest control
efforts that often emphasize poisoning and trapping.
With IPM, pests and disease vectors are managed

by managing the environment. For IPM to succeed,
the behavior and ecology of the target pest, the
environment in which the pest is active, and the
periodic changes that occur in the environment
(including the people who share the environment)
must be taken into account. In addition, the safety of
the people, the environment, and the nontarget animals
such as pets, birds, and livestock must be considered.

IPM is a decision-making process in which all
interventions are focused on a pest problem and on
the goal of providing the safest and most effective,
economical, and sustained remedy. IPM is a
comprehensive systems approach.

IPM is based on and should adhere to the sound
biologic principles of population dynamics—the study
of birth rates, mortality rates, and movement rates. An
understanding of population dynamics is important
because any successful strategy for the management

of rodent populations depends on that understanding
and on conducting appropriate interventions based on
IPM principles. A 1976 CDC publication on urban rat
control states that

‘political mechanisms must be able to administer
the control procedures that are dictated by the
principles [of population dynamics]. ...A corollary
of the strategy of working with principles is that
research should not continue in clear violation

of population principles in expectation that a
politically acceptable solution will be found.”

Program and political support are essential in obtaining
the necessary resources for an IPM program that takes
into account the complex interplay of rodents, people,
and environmental factors. The overall goals of IPM
are to reduce or eliminate human encounters with pests
and disease vectors and to reduce pesticide exposure.



Page 231: Program Components

The four key components of an IPM program are
survey, tolerance limit, intervention, and evaluation.
If a key component is omitted, success in managing or
eliminating pests is reduced.

Surveys (inspection and monitoring): A measure
of the magnitude of the pest problem and its
environmental causes. Survey results determine the
need for a rodent IPM program and the direction
the program must take to manage the rodent
problem. An urban rodent survey has four distinct
phases:

1. premises inspection (comprehensive or sample)
of defined areas (e.g., groups of blocks) to record

infestations and their causative conditions;

2. preparation of maps, graphs, and tables
to summarize survey results (may include

photographs of field observations);

3. preparation of a report that includes an
analysis of block and premises data, and
premises prevalence rates for infestation
and its causative conditions; and

4. recommendations to resolve the rodent
infestation problem.

Surveys are especially useful in the development
of educational interventions directed to the
public (e.g., Web sites, television and radio
programs, videos, newspaper articles, brochures,
posters, exhibits).

Tolerance limit (action threshold): The level

at which a pest causes sufficient damage to
warrant public health attention and intervention.
Real or perceived damage can be aesthetic and
can have economic, psychologic, and medical
consequences. In 1972, CDC established
tolerance limits for rodent infestation, exposed
garbage, and improperly stored refuse. Details of
these and other survey-based criteria are discussed
later in this manual. The survey establishes

the baseline on rodent infestation and on the
causative conditions that support the infestation.
The goal is to reduce both the infestation and the
causative conditions to a level at which they no
longer have an adverse effect on the community.

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

Interventions: Actions taken to prevent,

reduce, or eliminate rodent infestations and
their destructive effects. Survey data determine
when, where, what, and whether interventions
are necessary to prevent or eliminate a particular
pest problem. Interventions are classified

as educational, legal or regulatory, habitat
modification, horticultural, biologic, mechanical,
and chemical. These intervention categories
typically form an IPM strategy. Most commensal
rodent IPM programs emphasize educational
and legal or regulatory interventions, and habitat
modification.

The key to a successful IPM program is the
elimination of the causes of infestation (i.e.,
food, water, and harborage). The judicious and
careful use of pesticides (including toxicants) to
manage pests is also important for success. A vital
IPM “rule” for selecting rodenticides or other
pesticides is that the product chosen should be
the least toxic product that will be effective on a
target pest. The product also must have a highly
efficacious and readily available antidote that
can be administered in a timely manner for both
humans and pets if a rodenticide is inadvertently
ingested. Widespread and indiscriminate use

of pesticides, a problem Rachel Carson warned
about in her 1967 book Silent Spring, has serious
consequences for people, animals, and the
environment.

Evaluation: The evaluation process (composed
of periodic surveys) determines whether IPM
interventions have been effective or whether
they need to be repeated or modified. The
initial survey of residential and commercial
blocks and the periodic resurveys (monitoring)
of a target community provides the basis for
the evaluation of a program's progress.

Characteristics of Urban Rodent Surveys

A health-related government agency or department
typically manages a community-based vector control
program. For the purpose of this manual, such
agencies or organizations will be referred to as the
“IPM authority.” The responsible adult, whether

a homeowner or a renter, who grants permission

to inspect a premises or dwelling will be called the
“householder.”



Page 232: The initial urban rodent survey is the data gathering
phase of IPM program planning. Conducting the
survey provides the IPM authority with an opportunity
to inform residents about the program and to
encourage their support when survey teams inspect
their premises. An analysis of survey results will show
the extent and severity of rodent infestations and their
causative conditions and will delineate IPM program
needs as well as the progress made in comparison with
previous surveys.

To determine the magnitude of the rodent problem,
determine priorities, and evaluate progress, the IPM
program must maintain a premises and block records
management system. The system should provide

for sequentially reporting survey findings using
standardized reporting forms.

The urban rodent survey involves an exterior
inspection of premises to record significant data such

as active rodent signs, rodent entries to buildings, and
environmental deficiencies that provide food, water,
and harborage. Although the Norway rat and the roof
rat generally live outdoors, they do enter buildings

that are not rodent proofed. The house mouse can
survive outdoors, but it prefers indoor areas in an
urban habitat. Whenever rodents find suitable food,
water, and harborage, they become established and
reproduce rapidly. Interior inspections of dwellings

and buildings may be required if signs of infestation

are obvious. Gaining access to interiors of premises is,
however, generally more difficult, and the problems
associated with the management and control of interior
infestations are greater. Nevertheless, interior inspection
is considered an essential component of an IPM
program if clear evidence exists of significant interior
infestation.

Two forms are required for an exterior urban rodent
survey: a field inspection form and a summary form
for office tabulations (Appendix A, Figures 1-4;
Figures 1 and 3 are blank forms and Figures 2 and 4
are completed examples). These forms can be modified
to serve the special needs of local programs. Although
the use of check marks on a form may suffice to
indicate the presence of deficiencies on premises, some
programs use a coding system (e.g., letters, numbers,
colors) to record more detailed information. Examples
of such codes are furnished throughout this manual as
an alternative to the checkmark system.

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

The survey forms provide the necessary data to

plan and conduct a rodent IPM program. These

data identify the need for rodent proofing, code
enforcement, refuse management, cleanup of vacant
lots, removal of abandoned automobiles and appliances,
and other necessary interventions. The IPM approach
emphasizes site-specific combinations of interventions
to control or eliminate rodent populations.

In a more detailed version of the survey, a third form
can be added for interior inspections. This form can be
modified from the exterior inspection form to provide
detailed data for each area or room within residential
or commercial premises. This detailed information is
useful in two ways: in determining where rodents may
frequent and nest in particular areas of a premises or
dwelling and in assessing rodent-related risks such as
the potential for bites or food contamination.

Basic Units in the Operational Program

For planning, operating, and reporting purposes, all
rodent IPM programs use basic geographic units such
as the following:

1. Premises (to record existing conditions). A
premises is a plot of land with or without a
building. It is the basic unit of a program in
which survey items can be observed and recorded
(e.g., environmental deficiencies, active rodent
signs). Maintenance of a premises is usually the
responsibility of a householder (unless multiple
dwelling units are on a premises), superintendent,
or manager who must maintain the
environmental quality of the premises. For survey
purposes, all premises are classified as residential,
commercial, commercial and residential, or
vacant lot. Schools, parks, churches, and parking
areas are defined as commercial.

A premises may consist of an individual residence
and its surroundings—whether attached (e.g.,
row house) or detached (e.g., a stand-alone
home). A duplex house or a large apartment
building and its surroundings are considered a
single premises because they are usually under
one ownership and are situated on one plot of
land. The same criteria apply to a commercial
premises with a major building and other
structures. For larger aggregations of buildings,
such as several apartment buildings under one



Page 233: or several ownerships, each numbered building
and its surroundings are considered to be a
separate premises. Reviewing municipal tax
parcel maps may be helpful to clarify the physical
(e.g., property lines) and administrative (e.g.,
ownership) data related to a particular property.
Where available, use of a geographic information
system (GIS) to map properties can be helpful.

2. Block (to classify conditions). The block is a
convenient unit for reporting infestations and
causative conditions, recording interventions,
and determining progress. In a target community,
premises information should be aggregated for
each block and filed according to assigned block
numbers. A block is reported as infested as
long as any active rodent signs exist on a single
premises.

A block is ordinarily bounded by four streets,
but some blocks are bounded by three or fewer,
or may be irregular in form. In some cases,
imaginary boundaries conforming to prevailing
block sizes may be set to define a block.

3. Census Tract (multiple contiguous blocks). The
census tract is an excellent unit for large-scale
planning and reporting purposes. Some IPM
authorities use zones, wards, or elementary school
or health districts for reporting purposes.

4. Target Area (entire operational area of an IPM
program). Large cities may have several target
areas.

Sample Versus Comprehensive Surveys

The block survey is considered comprehensive if

all premises in all blocks in a defined target area are
surveyed. In a sample survey, all premises on a block
are inspected in a small but statistically valid number of
blocks in a defined target area. Comprehensive surveys
provide complete information on rodent infestation
and sanitary conditions in a defined target area. Sample
surveys are appropriate for defining an infestation
problem and its causative conditions for a target area,
but they are not appropriate for intervention purposes.

The sample survey is quicker to do than a
comprehensive survey because all premises are inspected

only within a randomly selected sample of the blocks in

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

the proposed or actual target area. This type of survey is
typically used to determine the need for a rodent IPM
program; to define program needs and requirements
for personnel, material, and equipment; and to later
evaluate program progress.

Sample surveys are not intended for citywide
application, although exceptions exist. Sample surveys
are valuable for determining potential target areas.
After a sample survey is completed, a comprehensive
survey needs to be conducted. Potential target areas
often are identified by number and location of rodent
complaints, reported rodent bites, deteriorating
housing conditions, and other related indicators
including causative conditions of infestation.

A comprehensive survey requires significantly more
personnel than a sample survey, but it has considerably
greater impact on the community because all premises
in the target area are inspected. Comprehensive
surveys should be conducted concurrently with

public education, community outreach, code
enforcement, neighborhood cleanup campaigns, and
other IPM activities. Two comprehensive surveys are
recommended per target area per year. More frequent
surveys are desirable, but resource considerations can be
a limiting factor.

Personnel Requirements

Ideally, urban rodent surveys should be conducted
by two-person teams, with the most qualified person
recording the data and making decisions about
questionable findings. Safety is also a factor in a team
approach.

Survey teams, where possible, should be composed of
experienced rodent control specialists, environmental
health specialists, or other trained personnel.
Knowledge of the area to be surveyed, when practical,
can also be helpful, especially if a member of the survey
team lives in the area to be surveyed. The survey teams
should be guided by the exterior inspection form,
which is to be completed during the inspection.

At least 3 to 5 days of classroom and field training
are recommended for inspectors to ensure that their
observational and recordkeeping skills are satisfactory.
To conduct interior inspections, additional classroom
and field training is necessary.



Page 234: IPM surveys are a detail-dependent process. The
number of premises inspected per team per day

will vary with experience, complexity of the built
environment, and other variables. For example, large
lots, multiple dwellings on a premises, difficult-to-
access alleys, and complex building designs need to be
considered in determining the time required to conduct
a survey.

In most communities, permission for entry onto
premises must be obtained before conducting an
inspection. People may resent the intrusion onto
their properties unless they understand and accept
the purpose of the inspections. Community support
should be sought to enhance program success. This
support can be gained by meeting with community
representatives, church groups, and others in advance
of the survey.

Survey Procedures

Conducting an urban rodent survey involves four
phases: preparation, public information and education,
inspection, and analysis.

1. Preparation. Planning the operation and
recruiting and training staff. Provision should be
made to secure official photo identification cards
and distinctive uniforms to identify field staff.
Vehicles that are clearly marked with the IPM or
department logo will enhance the community’
perception of the program. Vehicles are used to
transport inspection staff, materials, and supplies
for intervention purposes.

2. Public Information and Education. Using
communication materials to promote the IPM
program. Agencies or department officials
should use news media, Web sites, exhibits,
and brochures and posters as well as visit the
target area to inform residents in advance of
the survey and explain its importance. There
should be outreach to community organizations,
parent-teacher associations, churches, building
manager associations, trade unions, and other
groups to gain support for the program. Contact
should also be established with local official
agencies (e.g., housing, sanitation, sewer,
utilities) and others who may have interest in
or responsibilities associated with the program.

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

These contacts can be invaluable in the planning
and implementation process. In addition,
accommodation for residents who work during
the day needs to be built into the program’s work
schedule. This accommodation may sometimes
require that those working in public education
and outreach activities will have to work in the
early evenings or on weekends.

3. Inspection. /nspecting premises for active rodent
signs (e.g., droppings, rub marks, open burrows)
and causative conditions (¢.g., improper refuse
storage, pet food) in target areas and recording
data on the exterior inspection form (Appendix A,
Figure 1). Evaluation is an essential component
of the survey process. Taking photographs can
be helpful in understanding particular infestation
problems and can be used for training purposes
is part of the evaluation process. Although
inspections are generally conducted during
daylight hours, we recommend that senior staff
occasionally visit the target area at night to view
conditions during the rodents’ active period.
These night inspections will add clarity to the
relation between the rodents and their built
environment. They will also provide a better
understanding of the impact of poor refuse
management. Infrared video cameras can be used
to document rodent activity at night.

4. Analysis. Tabulating findings, analyzing data,
and comparing achievements. Analysis of data
provides the basis for developing work plans and
for preparing reports with recommendations
for eliminating infestations. Such reports often
are supplemented by tables, graphs, maps, and
photographs.

Sample Survey Methodology

Initiating a sample survey requires maps, survey forms,
and complete lists of blocks or premises of the target
area. Each premises must be clearly defined and given
a number so that it can be unambiguously identified
on the map. Because of expected variations in block
configurations, decide what constitutes a block for
survey purposes. All field personnel must be aware of
that definition.



Page 235: The procedure for selecting the sample number of
blocks for a random block survey follows:

1. Determine as closely as possible the number of
blocks and premises within the target area or
areas to be surveyed.

2. Determine the number of premises that will
have to be inspected to ensure statistical validity
(Table 1). Note: Sample sizes must adhere to the
minimum standards; the reliability of the survey
results depends on adherence to the standards.

3. Divide the number of blocks in a target area into
the estimated number of premises. The equation
below represents the average number of premises
per block in the target area.

20,000 premises
Example: ————————._ =
1,000 blocks

20 premises per block

4. Determine the number of blocks so that a
sufficient number of premises (as obtained from
Table 1) will be surveyed.

Example: If at least 500 premises need to be inspected,
and the target area contains an average of 25 premises
per block, then all premises on 20 blocks will need to
be surveyed.

500 premises needed
= 20 blocks

25 (average premises per block)

5. Select the 20 blocks by using a table of random
numbers (Appendix B, Table B-1), with each
number representing a specific numbered block.

Note: When using this method, every premises on a
selected block should be inspected, even if repeat visits
are required.

Another survey method is to randomly select a sample
of premises in the target area for inspection. For this
method, a complete list of premises is needed, but

such a list can be difficult to obtain. This particular
method requires assigning every premises a number and
identifying each premises on a map.

Survey Crews and Equipment

Two-person teams are more efficient to conduct block
surveys. Each team should carry the following items:

* asupply of field forms (exterior, interior, or
both, depending on the needs of the program),

* mechanical lead pencils and lead refills (0.5-
millimeter leads, HB type),

¢ clipboards,

* flashlights (rechargeable type is recommended),

* gloves,

* forceps,

* hand lenses (5—10X),

* small plastic vials and zip-close plastic bags for
field samples (e.g., dead rodent specimens, fecal
droppings),

¢ black light to detect rodent urine stains,

* dog repellent,

¢ digital still cameras, and

* mobile phones or pagers (for communication

between supervisors and inspection teams and
for emergency situations).

Table 1. Minimum Number of Premises Inspected to Ensure Statistical Validity*

Number of Premises in Target Area

Minimum Number of Premises to Inspect

10,000 or more 500
3,000-9,999 450
Up to 2,999 435

*Center for Disease Control. Urban rat surveys. Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human Services; 1974.

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys



Page 236: Note that a personal digital assistant (PDA) can be used
instead of the field forms, lead pencils, and clipboards.
Also note that infrared video cameras can be a valuable
tool for filming rodents at night.

For indoor inspections, add the following items:

* small and large flashlights (headlamps, if
practical),

* extendable inspection mirrors,

¢ dust masks or respirators,
¢ hard hats,

* portable vacuum cleaners with high-efficiency
particulate air (HEPA) filters, and

¢ small ladders (4 feet [1.2 meters]).

If a recording code (instead of a check mark) is to be
used on the forms for more precise information about
specific data categories, a copy of the codes should

be taped to the clipboard for easy reference. The
inspection forms can be relatively simple or can be
greatly detailed depending on the needs of the survey.
Inspection forms can be completed using PDAs and
other portable computer equipment.

Each team should have a supply of outreach literature
on the program to distribute to landlords and
householders during the surveys.

Premises Inspection—Exterior

Supervisors should hand out the block assignments
before the teams leave the office. For multiple teams,
the supervisor should remain in the immediate area to
monitor the work of the teams and to provide support
as needed.

A standardized survey process is more effective;

for example, begin the survey of each block at the
northeast corner and move clockwise. From this corner,
the inspectors proceed around the block, inspecting
each premises in the order established for the survey.
The two-member teams may work together on an
inspection, or, if both are experienced, they may
inspect alternate primeses and be available to assist
each other as needed. Placing a chalk mark on the curb

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

after a primeses has been inspected can be useful if a
supervisor needs to locate the team; however, inspectors
may use portable phones to maintain contact.

Each premises should be approached from its main
entrance area and should not be entered by crossing
yards. The inspector should request permission from

a responsible adult to conduct an inspection. A
brochure that explains the program can supplement
the explanation of the program and the purpose of the
inspection. Usually, only a few minutes are required to
communicate effectively with householders. Occupants
of the premises should be encouraged to join in the
survey of the premises. This participation allows
inspectors an opportunity to praise occupants for the
well-maintained aspects of the primeses, such as a clean
yard, and to tactfully call attention to active rodent
signs or sanitation deficiencies.

Inspectors should wear clear identification that
identifies them as a representative of the rodent IPM
program. Wearing distinctive official uniforms also can

be helpful in establishing identity with the program.

Before proceeding with the exterior inspection of

a premises, write the number of dwelling units on

the exterior inspection form (Appendix A, Figure 1,
column 7. See the Instructions for Completing the
Block Record (Exterior Inspection) Form section

on pages FILL). The team should then proceed in a
clockwise direction around the premises, inspecting
the buildings, yard, and passageway(s) or other spaces,
and recording all deficiencies on the survey form. The
inspection pattern is as follows:

* front (the facade or surface of the building that
contains the main entrance and its associated
yard or other spaces),

* left side (left wall surface of building and its
associated yard or other spaces),

* back or rear (the rear wall surface of the building
and its associated yard or other spaces), and

¢ right side (the right wall surface of the building
and its associated yard or other spaces).

Symbols can be used instead of check marks to record
information. These symbols can also be used as a
reference in the Remarks section or in the premises



Page 237: Address column of the form; for example, F: front
(with main entrance to building), L: left side, B: back
or rear, and R: right side.

Rodent signs should be observed at close range to
determine infestation. Inspectors should look for
active rodent runs or burrows in the yard, entry
routes into buildings, burrows under walls or in ditch
banks, rodent damage, fresh fecal droppings along
foundations, and other evidence of infestation.

Before leaving a premises, inspectors should check the
inspection form to make certain that all items have
been completed. Having a supervisor or another field
inspector recheck the survey findings on a subsequent
day to verify results can be helpful (e.g., taking a 10%
sample of the surveyed premises to ensure the recorded
information is accurate and complete).

In some instances, householders may refuse permission
for IPM staff to inspect their premises or dwelling.
These refusals should be noted on the report form

and referred to the supervisor. In other instances, no
responsible adult may be at home to grant permission
for inspection. In such cases, the policy of the IPM
authority determines whether to conduct the exterior
inspection.

Premises Inspection—Interior

The term “interior inspection” generally applies to

the main buildings on a premises and not to sheds or
outbuildings (this delineation can be modified to meet
the needs of the local IPM authority). Two-person
teams are recommended for interior inspections. The
work is detail-oriented, tedious, and often difficult to
accomplish because of clutter, furniture, and crowded
conditions.

Inspectors should check all rooms in the building for
rodent signs and sanitation deficiencies. Kitchens,
closets, bathrooms, attics, and basements are especially
attractive to commensal rodents. All floor levels of the
building should be inspected regardless of the suspected
species. Norway rats are usually found in basements
and on lower floors; upper floors and attic areas are
especially attractive to roof rats; and house mice can be
found nearly anywhere, including in cabinet drawers
and above drop ceilings. Householders often can be
helpful in providing specific information on a rodent
infestation.

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

In some communities, the interior rodent population
may be more difficult to manage or control than the
exterior population. The exterior inspection form
(Appendix A, Figure 1) can be modified for interior
inspections. When doing so, information such as level/
floor, room type, and number of occupants as well as
information on active rodent signs (droppings, holes,
gnawed materials, and rub marks) should be included
on the modified form. Information about rodent bites
should also be collected.

Infestation rates (i.e., percent of apartments in a
building with active rodent signs) are useful in
comparing conditions or measuring IPM progress over
time.

Inspection teams should follow standardized procedures
for interior inspections. For example, in a multifamily
apartment building, start in the basement, then work
upward, inspecting apartments in numerical order, then
inspect the attic or crawlspace, and finally the roof (if
accessible). Enter each apartment through the front
(main) door and inspect the wall that contains the main
door as well as everything on or touching that wall for
signs of rodents and potential rodent entries. Move
clockwise to the next wall and continue until all walls
are inspected. Next, inspect the floor area, including
anything on or touching the floor. Last, inspect the
ceiling area, including anything on or touching the
ceiling. Each room should be inspected in the same
manner. Closets should be inspected in association with
particular walls of a room.

This standardized inspection method provides very
specific data on rodent locations for intervention
purposes. The data also simplify the tracking of specific
changes over time and provide information for other
inspectors.

Instructions for Completing the Block
Record (Exterior Inspection) Form

The Block Record—Exterior Rodent Inspection

and Sanitation Form (Appendix A, Figure 1) is used

to record information on rodent infestation and
environmental deficiencies for each premises on a
block. The form has space for recording information
for 10 premises; additional forms can be used as
necessary. Enter the page number in the space provided
at the top right corner of the form (ie., “1 of 2,” “2 of
2”). If only one form is required for a block, use the



Page 238: same notation (i.e., “1 of 1”) to clarify that only one
page is required. In addition, enter the names of the
inspectors at the top of the form in the space provided.

Other items at the top of the form should be completed
by the supervisor or team leader before the teams enter
entering the field. The location of a block should be
indicated by writing the names of the streets that form
the block in the block diagram space in the upper left
portion of the form.

A copy of the assignment chart should be kept in the
inspector's or supervisor's office.

Completed inspection forms (Appendix A, Figure 2)
should be checked and initialed by the inspectors.

All columns of block data should be totaled and
recorded on the appropriate line of the summary form
(Appendix A, Figure 4 is a completed example). The
summary form should be used to prepare progress
reports, identify problems, and target resources.

Premises Address

¢ As inspectors proceed clockwise around a
block, they should write each street address in
the left column. If an indoor inspection has
been conducted at a particular address, the line
number (1 to 10) in the “No.” column should
be circled.

Premises Type

A premises must be classified in one of four categories
(columns 1-4): residential, commercial and residential,
commercial, or vacant lot. Only one of the first four
columns should be checked.

Column 1: Residential

Put a check in this column if the unit is a home

or dwelling (defined as an enclosed space used for
living purposes). A dwelling can be a single-family or
multifamily unit. Enter the number of dwelling units
in column 7 (No. of Dwelling Units).

Column 2: Commercial and Residential

Put a check in this column if a premises is used for
both commercial (see column 3 description) and
residential purposes.

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

Column 3: Commercial

Put a check in this column if the premises is used only
for commercial purposes (including parking lots) or for
other nonresidential purposes such as offices, churches,
clubhouses, or schools. The type of premises (e.g.,
school) may also be written in the address column.
Some IPM programs may decide to use a code for
recording public properties, clubs, churches, or other
types of nonresidential properties.

Column 4: Vacant Lot

Put a check in this column for a lot with no structure
on it. Note that a parking lot should be designated as
“commercial.”

Premises Details

Use these four columns of the inspection form to
record information that may be helpful in estimating
population density and in determining resource needs
for intervention purposes.

Column 5: Food-Commercial

Put a check in this column if a regular, primary
function of the premises is to prepare, sell, serve or
dispense, or store food materials, including animal
foods. Thus, restaurants, delicatessens, soup kitchens,
bakeries, grocery stores, nursing homes and hospitals
(where daily meals are served), pet stores, and grain
warehouses should be included here. Both this column
and column 2 or 3 should be checked.

Column 6: Vacant

Put a check in this column if the main building on
the premises is not in use, whether temporarily vacant,
permanently abandoned, or boarded up and scheduled
for demolition. Abandoned buildings generally are
not considered habitable because of deterioration

(e.g., broken windows, missing doors, vandalism, fire
damage). If more precise information is desired, three
symbols can be used in this column instead of a check
mark: V: vacant and habitable, AO: abandoned and
open, and AS: abandoned and sealed.

Column 7: No. of Dwelling Units

Enter the number of dwelling units here. Determining
the number of dwelling units on a premises should be
based on the following definition:



Page 239: A dwelling unit is a room or group of rooms
located within a building or structure that
forms a single habitable unit to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.

Multiple dwelling units (e.g., apartments) can exist
on a premises. The number of mailboxes, meters, or
doorbells is an indicator of the number of dwelling
units on a premises. Only the number of habitable
dwelling units on a premises should be marked; non-
inhabitable dwelling units should not be marked.

Column 8: Sewers on Premises

Put a check in this column to record the presence of

a sewer pipes or storm water drains on the premises.
Sewers can provide harborage, and rats often travel
between a premises sewer and the exterior portions of
the premises. Evidence of harborage includes active
burrows near manholes, catch basins, or broken sewer
pipes, and fresh rub marks on broken downspouts

that empty into sewers. If other sewer deficiencies are
found, do not check them; use an asterisk and include a
footnote under the Remarks section of the form.

Food

These columns (numbers 9-12) provide information
on food sources that must be eliminated.

Proper storage of refuse (also called municipal

solid waste or MSW) requires the use of rodent-
proof containers of adequate construction, size, and
number. Refuse is defined as a mixture of garbage
and rubbish. Garbage consists largely of human food
waste (organic, putrescible), but it includes offal,
carrion, and animal feces (e.g., dog or horse). Rubbish
is considered nonfood solid wastes (combustible and
noncombustible, nonputrescible) such as metal, glass,
furniture, carpeting, paper, and cardboard. Rubbish
also includes wood chips and yard wastes.

In conducting rodent surveys, the following criteria for
refuse storage are recommended.

Approved Refuse Storage

¢ Refuse containers should be water tight
with tight fitting lids that may be hinged;
rust resistant; structurally strong; and easily

filled, emptied, and cleaned. Standard refuse

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

containers are 20-32 gallons (91-150 liters).
Hinged containers with wheels can hold up to
95 gallons (430 liters). Bulk containers such
as dumpsters have side handles or bail for
manual handling or special attachment hooks
and devices for automatic or semiautomatic

handling.

¢ Bulk storage containers are generally acceptable
and are often used in multihousing buildings,
commercial establishments, and construction
sites. Such containers often have a drain hole
to facilitate cleaning. These drain holes are
often 2—3 inches (5—8 centimeters) in diameter
and are fitted with a removable hardware cloth
screen or screw-on plug to prevent entry by
rodents.

© Galvanized metal or heavy, high-grade plastic
containers meet the guidelines under a in the
Column 10 section.

* Cardboard boxes used for yard trash (essentially
nonfood items) are acceptable.

¢ Plastic or moisture resistant paper bags used for
refuse, properly tied and intact, placed at the
curb or alley only on collection day and only
during daylight hours are acceptable.

Plastic Bags

Plastic refuse bags are widely used as liners in standard
20-32 gallon (91-150 liters) and larger refuse
containers. These bags are required by many building
managers for refuse placed in bulk containers and are
used by many residents for yard trash.

To judge whether plastic bags are managed properly:

* Know the scheduled refuse collection days in the
block being surveyed.

* Observe whether the storage site contains both
acceptable bags and refuse containers or whether
plastic bags appear to be the sole containers for
storing refuse.

Plastic bags are not considered appropriate for
overnight storage outdoors because nocturnally active
rodents and other animals (e.g., cats, dogs) can easily

10



Page 240: gain access to their contents. Plastic bags should be
considered acceptable only when placed outside during
daylight hours for collection the same day.

Approved Recyclable Storage

* Outdoor containers for recyclable items (paper,
cardboard, plastic, glass, or metal cans) should
be water-tight, strong enough to support
the weight of items contained, and easy for
sanitation crews to handle.

* Containers similar to those for refuse storage are
generally acceptable for household recyclables,
as are large plastic bags properly tied and intact
and placed at the curb or alley only during
daylight hours on collection day.

¢ Inall cases, items stored should be free of food
particles or other food residue.

To judge whether recyclables are managed properly:

* Know the scheduled recyclable collection days
for the block being surveyed.

* Observe whether the recyclable items have
been cleaned or rinsed or are otherwise free of
food residue and that the plastic bags or other
containers holding the recyclables are intact.

Column 9: Unapproved Refuse Storage

Put a check in this column if garbage, rubbish, other
refuse, or recyclable items are not stored in approved
containers with tight fitting lids (or are not in tightly
tied bags—where acceptable—during daytime only).
Approved containers should be of the design described
in the Approved Refuse Storage section. When
properly placed in plastic or paper bags, securely tied,
and regularly collected, yard trash and other inedible
materials are approved. Yard trash is acceptable when
placed in cardboard boxes or paper bags and regularly
collected.

Put a check in this column if any of the following
conditions are observed:

¢ Container that is not rodent and fly tight.
* Screw-on plug or rodent-excluding screen of

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

an otherwise approved bulk container is not in
place or is missing.

* 55 gallon (250-liter) drum. Such containers
are often observed without a tight-fitting cover.
When filled, they are too heavy and bulky to
handle.

¢ Nonstandard metal or cardboard containers that
are not being used for regularly collected yard
trash.

¢ Bin or stationary receptacle for refuse storage.

* Receptacle too small or too few receptacles for
the amount of refuse.

* Overflowing receptacle or one with the cover

off.

* Container(s) on a platform on the ground
or with a shallow space (<18 inches [46
centimeters] high) that offers harborage for
rodents and possibly hides scraps of food spilled

from the container.
¢ Burned refuse.

* Scattered refuse (including garbage, rubbish, or
recyclables).

More-precise information can be obtained by using
symbols instead of check marks to record specific
deficiencies.

Column 10: Exposed Garbage

Put a check in this column if observed refuse storage
practices make garbage available to rodents. In many
cases, a premises may be noted for Unapproved Refuse

Storage, but no garbage available to rodents is observed.

Exposed garbage should be noted on the basis of the
following:

a. Garbage container is not rodent tight (the
space between the container and lid is greater
than % inch [0.64 centimeters], and the
container is used for garbage storage).

b. Garbage in an open container
is available to rodents.

pial



Page 241: c. Garbage is scattered on the ground. Plastic bags
containing garbage are ripped, present after
dark, not properly tied, or have obviously not
been collected for longer than 1 day. Clean
beer cans, soft-drink bottles, and old food
cans and jars are not considered a rodent food
source. Note: Vegetable and fruit plants are
recorded under Other Food and Plants,
not as Exposed Garbage. Any premises
marked for Exposed Garbage should also be
marked for Unapproved Refuse Storage.

Column 11: Animal Food

Put a check here if uneaten animal food (e.g., food for
pets such as dogs or cats, birds, or livestock) is exposed
outdoors or if it is exposed in an outbuilding accessible
to rodents. Exposed pet food, other than for immediate
feeding, should be recorded. In the case of birdfeeders,
check only if uneaten birdseed is observed on the
ground and is readily available to rodents. However,
some commensal rodents are excellent climbers, so
caution should be exercised in assessing birdfeeders.
Animal food should not be recorded as exposed
garbage.

Column 12: Other Food and Plants

Put a check in this column if vegetables, fruit and nut
trees, or ornamental shrubs and vines with fruits and
berries are accessible to rodents. Put a check in this
column if exposed food items in the dwelling’s interior
are observed but are not easily classified in the other
four columns. Items for this column include soiled
dishes exposed overnight, food waste on the stove or in
the oven, and solid or liquid foods on the floor.

Water

Although commensal rodent dependency on water
varies with diet and species, water sources should be
eliminated. High-protein diets increase a rodent’s need
for water, but house mice are capable of living with
little water. All three species (Norway rat, roof rat, and
house mouse), however, are attracted to water when it
is available. Natural bodies of water, such as streams,
lakes, and ponds, are excluded from the survey. The
three survey categories in the Water section (columns
13-15) are observable water resources that need to

be managed as part of IPM habitat modification
interventions. Only one of the three columns should be
checked for water available to rodents.

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

Water and moisture reduction can also enhance IPM
practices to control mosquitoes, cockroaches, and mold
(especially indoors).

Column 13: Standing Water

Put a check in this column if water accumulations that
are accessible to rodents are found in containers such
as buckets, pans, discarded tires, water bowls for pets,
window pits of basements, and clogged rain gutters.
For indoor inspections, check for water and other
consumable liquids that are available overnight in open
containers on tables or desks or in sinks, cooking pans,
and buckets.

Column 14: Condensate

Put a check in this column if condensate is available
to rodents in, for example, collection pans under
refrigeration or air conditioning units; from dripping
or running water from a pipe onto the ground or
pavement (or onto a basement floor indoors); or
directly from the surface of, or dripping from, cold
water pipes indoors.

Column 15: Leaks

Put a check in this column if water is regularly leaking
from, for example, a roof, pipe, or outdoor faucet onto
the ground, pavement, or floor (indoors). For observed
leaks, do not check the Standing Water category even if
water has accumulated.

Harborage

The seven survey items in this section (columns 16-22)
pertain to the providing of harborage for rodents. Put
a check in any column only if the inspector judges that
a significant rodent harborage condition is evident.
For some surveys, quantifying the harborage present is
helpful (e.g., using figures to indicate the number of
abandoned vehicles and appliances or to estimate the
number of cubic yards or cubic meters of large piles

of rubbish, lumber, or clutter that is on the ground

or on the floor indoors. These figures can be useful

in estimating the resources needed for cleanup and

for measuring progress in reducing the amount of
harborage present.



Page 242: Column 16: Abandoned Vehicles

Put a check in this column if abandoned vehicles are
in the yard, street, or alley. A vehicle is considered
abandoned if the license tag is not current, if major
parts are missing, or if high grass and weeds are
growing around it. Abandoned vehicles observed in
rodent-accessible garages should also be recorded. The
summary line at the bottom of the form should note
the number of premises with abandoned vehicles.
The total number of vehicles may be entered directly
below the column total if vehicles are counted for each
premises.

Column 17: Abandoned Appliances

Put a check in this column if appliances (such as
refrigerators, stoves, or washing machines) are stored in
the yard, in a dilapidated outbuilding, or at the edge of
an adjoining street or alley. Put only one check mark
regardless of the number of items observed; however,
the number of appliances may be entered in the
column instead of a check mark. The survey summary
line should show the number of premises with
abandoned appliances, not the number of appliances.
The total number of appliances may be entered directly
below the column total if appliances are counted for
each premises.

Column 18: Lumber or Clutter on the Ground

Put a check in this column if a significant amount
(covering at least 1 square yard or 1 square meter) of
lumber, firewood, or clutter is on the ground. These
materials provide harborage for rodents. Clutter,

either outdoors or indoors, is defined as disorganized
storage of usable materials (not rubbish) that is not
being used and which impedes inspections for active
rodent infestation. A few scattered pieces of lumber

or other materials should not be recorded, nor should
lumber left on the ground as a result of recent building
construction or demolition and is subject to early
removal. If the amount is to be quantified, estimate the
number of cubic yards (or cubic meters) to the nearest
whole number. The number recorded in the Total row
at the bottom of the column, however, is always the
total number of premises with a deficiency. The total
number of cubic yards (or cubic meters) of lumber or
clutter may be entered directly below the column total
for premises.

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

Column 19: Other Large Rubbish

In both exterior and interior inspections, put a check in
this column if there are discarded items of rubbish that
are too large or otherwise not suitable for storage in
approved refuse containers. These items include tires,
automobile engines, large cans and drums, tree limbs,
rubble, doors, mattresses, furniture, and other large
items not listed in other columns. If the amount is to
be quantified, estimate the number of cubic yards (or
cubic meters) to the nearest whole number and enter
the number directly below the column total.

Column 20: Outbuildings or Privies

Put a check in this column only if the buildings on

the premises are dilapidated or otherwise provide
significant rodent harborage. A tight, well maintained
building or an open, clean shed should not be recorded.
Appliances, lumber, clutter, or large rubbish in an open
shed should be reported in their respective columns

if they furnish harborage. Always check this column
when privies or outhouses are found.

Column 21: Board Fences and Walls

Put a check in this column if dilapidated board
fences, walls, or concrete slabs (e.g., patio slabs,
broken sidewalks) are found because they can provide
harborage for rodents.

Column 22: Plant-Related

Put a check in this column if weeds or grass are more
than 12 inches (0.3 meters) high and are sufficiently
thick to hide refuse and provide harborage for rodents.
Bushes and overgrown shrubbery that provide rodent
harborage are also deficiencies that should be recorded.
Note that roof rats are climbers and prefer to nest in
trees, bushes, and attics of dwellings and outbuildings.
Put a check mark in this column if dense growth such
as ivy, honeysuckle, pyracantha, ground cover, dense
shrubbery or vines, or palm trees provide harborage
for rodents. Large planters indoors or outdoors may
provide harborage for rodents, either in the soil or
among dense vegetation. If more precise information is
desired, symbols identifying types of dense growth may
be used to record such deficiencies.

I3



Page 243: Entry and Access

The two columns in this section (columns 23—24) are
for recording the need for rodent-stoppage work to
prevent rodents from entering structures.

A Norway rat can gain access to a structure through a
hole the diameter of a U.S. quarter (0.96 inches or
24.3 millimeters in diameter) and a mouse can gain
access through a hole the diameter of a U.S. dime
(0.71 inches or 17.9 millimeters in diameter).
Structural openings should be less than 34-inch (<19
millimeters) in diameter to exclude adult Norway
rats, less than %-inch (<13 millimeters) in diameter
to exclude adult roof rats, and less than “-in (<6
millimeters) in diameter to exclude adult mice. If
openings are sealed (totally closed), cockroaches and
other insects will also be excluded.

From a running start, a house mouse can jump up to
2 feet (0.6 meters) high, a Norway rat up to 3 feet (0.9
meters) high, and a roof rat up to 4 feet (1.2 meters)
high. Therefore, openings up to 5 feet (1.5 meters)
from the ground must be sealed or covered with mesh.

Column 23: Structural Deficiencies

Put a check in this column if an actual or potential
rodent entry to a building because of deterioration or
structural defects is observed. Common defects include
holes in crumbling masonry foundations, deteriorated
fascia boards at the edge of roofs, and poorly fitted
doors with gaps of sufficient size to permit rodent
entry.

Column 24: Pipe and Wiring Gaps

Check this column to indicate that a gap or hole
associated with a wire, pipe, or other conduit penetrates
the building exterior (including basement floor or roof)
and is sufficiently large to permit rodent entry. For
indoor inspections, check this column if openings in
interior walls, floors, or ceilings are found.

Active Signs

Put a check in column 25 if active or fresh rodent signs
are observed during exterior or interior inspections.
A premises is considered infested with rodents only
if active signs are found (e.g., sightings, droppings,
runways, rub marks, burrows or openings, gnaw marks,

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

tracks). The infestation rate is calculated on the basis of
the number of premises on a block with active rodent
signs divided by the total number of premises on a
block times 100.

If additional details are desired, symbols could be
placed in or next to the column to distinguish signs
attributable to Norway rats, roof rats, or house mice.
Active rodent signs usually will be one or more of the
signs listed below. More precise information can be
recorded by using the following symbols instead of
check marks:

B. Burrows: active burrow entrances do not have
cobwebs or other blockages.

D. Fecal droppings or urine: fresh feces are dark and
soft; old feces are hard or gray and brittle; urine
may be wet, glossy, or sticky or may be a dried
stain. A black light can help show rodent urine
stains.

H. Gnawed holes, gnaw marks, or tooth marks: a
freshly gnawed surface is usually light in color.

M. Rub marks: if fresh, they are black, soft, and
greasy.

R. Runs: well traveled paths (Note: runs usually lead
to food sources, water, and harborage).

T. Tracks: fresh foot tracks or tail-drag marks.

Z. Rodent hairs: often found on rub marks or at
entry holes to buildings.

Remarks

This section at the bottom of the form is for additional
information.

Interior Inspection Using a Modified
Block Record (Exterior Inspection) Form

Much of the methodology for completing an interior
inspection is the same or similar to that for an exterior
inspection. A modified interior inspection form focuses
exclusively on deficiencies found indoors. An interior
form should include space for the premises address

and the number of dwelling units at that address. The
form's design should depend on the needs of the local

14



Page 244: IPM program, but suggested categories are listed in this
section. Many of these categories are explained in the
Instructions for Completing the Block Record (Exterior
Inspection) Form; categories not explained in that
section are explained below.

Premises Type

¢ residential,
* commercial and residential, and
* commercial.
Premises Details
¢ level or floor (where unit is located),

* room type (e.g., bedroom, bathroom, hallway,
kitchen),

* number of occupants in unit, and

* sewer pipes or storm water drains on premises.

* unapproved refuse storage,
* exposed garbage,
* animal food,

* unapproved food storage (food material stored
in open or unprotected boxes, bags, bins,
or other containers or stored under storage
conditions that are not rodent proof [e.g., cereal
cartons]), and

¢ other food and plants.

Water
* standing water,
* condensate, and
¢ plumbing leaks.

Harborage

* clutter or storage on the floor,

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

* other large rubbish,
¢ plant-related, and

* other harborage (small accumulations of
material that may be viewed as providing
harborage [e.g., piles of clothes on the floor]).

Entry and Access

¢ structural deficiencies and

* pipe and wiring gaps

Active Signs

* fecal droppings, urine;
* holes, gnawings, burrows;
¢ tracks, runs, rub marks; and

* rodent bites reported (This item is to capture
information on whether the occupant has
reported being bitten by a rodent within
the 6-month period before the inspection.
Information should be collected about the
demographics of the victim, the biting incident,
and the action taken by the health authority.
Information about the rodent infestation, bites,
circumstances, unsanitary conditions, food and
water access, and harborage will be valuable in
the effort to eliminate the infestation.

Note: Having the inspection team carry a small
portable HEPA-filtering vacuum cleaner to remove
rodent signs (e.g., droppings and nesting material)
may be beneficial. The vacuum cleaner can also be
used to remove potentially allergenic material from the
dwelling.

Remarks

The modified interior inspection form should also
include a Remarks section to record additional
information (e.g., heavy rat infestation in an apartment
with very young children) that requires immediate
attention or referral to another department.

15



Page 245: GIS and Mapping

GIS is a highly valued tool, as are maps of the target
area or community. Maps help define the infestation
problem and its causes as well as measure progress
toward eliminating the problem. Maps of the target
area are often used by programs to make block
inspection assignments, show changing patterns in
infestations and their causative conditions, and measure
progress in addressing the rodent problem. Table 2
shows examples of the types of major deficiencies and
associated map colors on a GIS map.

Maps may be prepared for other causative conditions,
including water sources and entry and access routes.
These maps can be used as a tool to determine
priorities for corrective actions.

The goal of an IPM program should be to reduce
rodent populations and their causative conditions to

a level that they no longer have an adverse effect on
the community. The following set of criteria should be
achieved for a block or for the defined target area:

2% or less of the premises

with active exterior rodent signs and either
15% or less of the premises

with exposed garbage,

or

30% or less of the premises with
unapproved refuse storage.

These criteria are based on those used by the federal
urban rat control program directed by CDC from
1972 to 1981 throughout the United States. About
80,000 blocks in 65 communities heavily infested
with rats applied these criteria in their IPM efforts and
attained an essentially rat-free and environmentally
improved status. Hence, this set of criteria became
widely accepted as the tolerance limit for a block, target
area, or community. Local rodent IPM authorities may
establish tolerance limits for other deficiency categories
as needed. Tolerance limits will provide evaluative
feedback to determine the direction to be taken by a
rodent IPM program.

Categories

Rodent Infestation

Active Rodent Signs

Table 2. Types of Major Exterior Deficiencies and Associated Colors on a GIS Map
Premises Deficient (%) *

Color on Map

2% or less

2%-25%

Rodent Food

Unapproved Refuse Storage

Exposed Garbage

ee
[scien

26%-100% Red

15%-30%

31%-100%

premises on a block times 100.

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

*Percentages have been rounded to the nearest whole number.

Infestation is calculated as the number of premises with active rodent signs divided by the total number of




Page 246: Comprehensive surveys (i.e., premises-by-premises)

to identify active rodent signs and their causative
conditions should be conducted, at a minimum, twice
yearly for all blocks that have not reached the tolerance
limits for active rodent signs, exposed garbage, or
unapproved refuse storage. Comprehensive inspections
should continue until 80% or more of the blocks in

a target area have achieved the established tolerance
limit and have maintained that status for at least 1 year.
Thereafter, a sample survey procedure may be used two
or more times a year to verify the status of the target
area blocks that have achieved the tolerance limit; for
the other blocks, comprehensive inspections should be
conducted at least twice yearly.

If the survey data indicate that conditions have
deteriorated and that rates of active rodent signs,
exposed garbage, and unapproved refuse storage have
risen above the tolerance limit, appropriate IPM
interventions will be required based on the analysis of
the data.

Interior Tolerance Limits

Interior inspections require visiting every room of every
unit or every location of a structure on a premises.
These visits provide inspectors with a detailed profile
of the infestation and its causative conditions. One
difficulty in this aspect of an urban IPM program

is that inspectors are not likely to gain entry to all
premises, units, or locations.

From the standpoint of good public health practice, the
tolerance limit for rats or mice in human living quarters
should be zero; that is, rodents should not live with
people. To achieve and sustain a zero-tolerance limit for
rodent infestation for one or more dwelling units, the
same criteria should apply as that for exterior exposed
garbage and unapproved refuse storage.

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

For interior surveys, the following additional broad-
scale tolerance limit should be established:

15% or less of the premises with rodent entry and
access routes within 5 feet (1.5 meters) of grade or
other low horizontal surfaces.

This tolerance limit for entry and access routes may
not fully address the problem of rodent access to
exterior premises, but it greatly increases the likelihood
of achieving the zero tolerance limit for rodents in
dwelling units, a key quality-of-life issue. This limit
also promotes the application of rodent-stoppage
interventions that are essential to reducing interior
infestation.

The urban rodent survey is an essential tool in the IPM
effort to manage rodent problems. The survey provides
precise information about infestations and their
causative conditions, and it measures progress toward
their elimination.

This manual should serve as a basis for designing

and conducting valid surveys to determine the
magnitude of infestation problems and their causes,
for implementing interventions, and for measuring
progress. The survey, however, is only a framework for
the many activities of a rodent IPM program. An IPM
program cannot succeed without the commitment of
the local health authority, other professionals, and the
public.

17



Page 247: Selected References

Center for Disease Control. National urban rat control
project directors meeting; 1974 Apr 30—May 2;
Atlanta, Georgia. Atlanta: US Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare; 1974.

Center for Disease Control. Urban rat surveys. Atlanta:
US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare;
1974.

Center for Disease Control. Urban rat control program
survey methodology. Atlanta: US Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare; 1975.

Center for Disease Control. Urban rat control program:
interior rat control: definitions and criteria. Atlanta: US
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; 1977.

Center for Disease Control. Urban rat control program:
roof rat control: definitions and criteria. Atlanta: US
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; 1977.

Centers for Disease Control. Urban rat surveys.
Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human
Services; 1980. HHS publication number CDC 80-
8344.

Davis DE. In: Houk VN, editor. Focus: urban rat
control/environmental health abstracts. Atlanta: US
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; 1976.

Frantz SC. Evaluation of rodent infestations in Nepal:
a preliminary report. J Nepal Med Assoc. 1974:12(3—
4):17-32.

Frantz SC. The behavioral/ecological milieu of godown
bandicoot rats—implications for environmental
manipulation. In: Proceedings of the All India Rodent
Seminar, Ahmedabad, Rodent Control Project; 1975
Sep 23-26, Sidhpur, Gujarat, India. Sidhpur, Gujarat,
India: Rodent Control Project; 1977. p. 95-101.

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

Frantz SC. Rodent control: a case for integrated pest
management program (IPM). In: Preventive Health
Services Conference; 1979 May 7-11; Ellenville, New
York. Atlanta: US Department of Health, Education,
and Welfare; 1979.

Frantz SC. Architecture and commensal vertebrate pest
management. In: Kundsin RB, editor. Architectural
design and indoor microbial pollution. New York:
Oxford University Press; 1988. p. 228-95.

Frantz SC. Integrated pest management in New York
State. IPM Practitioner. 1996;18(2):8-10.

Frantz SC, Comings JP. 1976. Evaluation of urban
rodent infestations—An approach in Nepal. In: Siebe
CC, editor. Proceedings of the Seventh Vertebrate Pest
Conference; 1976 Mar 9-11; Monterey, California.
Davis, CA: University of California at Davis. p. 279-
90.

Frantz SC, Davis DE. Bionomics and integrated pest
management of commensal rodents. In: Gorham JR,
editor. Ecology and management of food-industry
pests. FDA Technical Bulletin 4. Arlington, VA:
Association of Official Analytical Chemists. 1991. p.
243-313.

Frantz SC, Gallagher D. IPM implementation in

New York State government facilities. In: Seventeenth
Vertebrate Pest Conference; 1996 Mar 4—7.Rohnert
Park, CA. Davis, CA: University of California at Davis.
1996.

Littig KS, Bjornson BE, Pratt HD, Fehn CE Urban rat
surveys. Washington, DC: US Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare; no date. Available at URL:
http://courses.washington.edu/envh442/Readings/

Reading03.pdf.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National
Center for Environmental Health. Managing rodents
and mosquitoes through integrated pest management
[video]. A Public Health Training Network Satellite
Broadcast, 2003 Sep 18. Atlanta: US Department of
Health and Human Services; 2003.

18



Page 248: Appendix A—Survey Forms

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

19



Page 249: Figure 1. Block Record—Exterior Rodent Inspection and Sanitation Form (blank)
BLOCK RECORD—EXTERIOR RODENT INSPECTION AND SANITATION FORM

Inspector(s): Inspector(s) Additional Block Information:
Initials:

Premises Address

14. Condensate

16. Abandoned Vehicles
17. Abandoned Appliances
18. Lumber/Clutter on Ground
19. Other Large Rubbish
20. Outbuildings/Privies
21. Board Fences & Walls
22. Plant-Related

23. Structural Deficiencies
24. Pipe/Wiring Gaps

25. Active Signs

9. Unapproved Refuse Storage
15. Leaks

1. Residential

2. Commercial & Residential
3. Commercial

4. Vacant Lot

5. Food-Commercial

6. Vacant

7. No. of Dwelling Units
8. Sewers on Premises
10. Exposed Garbage
11. Animal Food

12. Other Food & Plants
13. Standing Water

[Remarks (continue on back of form as necessary):




Page 250: Figure 2. Block Record—Exterior Rodent Inspection and Sanitation Form (completed example)
BLOCK RECORD—EXTERIOR RODENT INSPECTION AND SANITATION FORM

City: Metropolis Census Tract: Inspector(s): Inspector(s) Additional Block Information: 15 premises Date 07 Fann
54. H. Smith, Initials: HS, AJ total accessed
County: Chandler Block Numbe A. Jones
27 Page 1 of
. 3 , Entry/
Premises Type Premises Details Food Water Harborage
Access

King Ave

f

N

Chavez Ave

Premises Address

646 Ruskin St.

23. Structural Deficiencies

24. Pipe/Wiring Gaps

9. Unapproved Refuse Storage
25. Active Signs

1. Residential

2. Commercial & Residential
3. Commercial

4. Vacant Lot

5. Food-Commercial

6. Vacant

7. No. of Dwelling Units

8. Sewers on Premises

10. Exposed Garbage

11. Animal Food

12. Other Food & Plants
13. Standing Water

14. Condensate

15. Leaks

16. Abandoned Vehicles
17. Abandoned Appliances
18. Lumber/Clutter on Ground
19. Other Large Rubbish
20. Outbuildings/Privies
21. Board Fences & Walls
22. Plant-Related

648 Ruskin St.

650 Ruskin St.

652 Ruskin St.

654 Ruskin St.

[Chavez Ave.; data not shown]

661 Biko St.

663 Biko St.

[King St.; data not shown]

1243 King St.

Remarks (continue on back of form as necessary):




Page 251: Figure 3. Summary—Exterior Rodent Inspection and Sanitation Form (blank)
SUMMARY—EXTERIOR RODENT INSPECTION AND SANITATION FORM

Number of Premises With Deficiencies

suBis aanoy *

sdeg Buniyy/edid *

seloualoyeq jesnjonys °

payejoy-jueld *

SIEM 8 Se0uUa4 pseog *

S@IALd/SBuIpIINGING *

ysiggny 261e7 JeyiO °

Punolg uo sayN}O“equinq *

seouel|ddy peuopueqy °

sejolye, pauopueqy *

syeoq “

@JESUBPUOD *

Jaye Buipueys *

SJUB|d 8 POOF JEUIO ‘ZL

poos Jewluy "|,

afeques pasodxy ‘o)

Additional Information:

aBe1ojs asnyay paroiddeun 6

SOSIWAJd UO SIBMS *

SHUN Buljjemq Jo ON °

Inspector(s)
Initials:

JUBDeA *

[BIA WWOD-Poo *

yO] Jue *

[RIDJOWUWOD *

jenuapisey 9g JeINJeWWOD *

jenuapisey *

Promines Type Promises Details owe
Access

SOSIWAd JO JOQWNN

JaqUinN 4901g

meee

a
©
a
ia)
®
fs)
®
c
a
©
E
&
ra
is)
x
©
icy
a
e
io)
©
S
&
fe)
2
a
x
=
©
£
o
[4




Page 252: Figure 4. Summary—Exterior Rodent Inspection and Sanitation Form (completed example)
SUMMARY—EXTERIOR RODENT INSPECTION AND SANITATION FORM
Number of Premises With Deficiencies

City: Metropolis Census Tract: Inspector(s): Inspector(s) Additional Information:
54-A H. Smith Initials:
County: Chandler Block Number: A. Jones HS, AJ
Entry/
Premises Type Premises Details Food Water Harborage
Access

17. Abandoned Appliances
18. Lumber/Clutter on Ground
19. Other Large Rubbish

20. Outbuildings/Privies

21. Board Fences & Walls
22. Plant-Related

23. Structural Deficiencies
24. Pipe/Wiring Gaps

9. Unapproved Refuse Storage
25. Active Signs

Block Number

Number of Premises

1. Residential

2. Commercial & Residential
3. Commercial

4. Vacant Lot

5. Food-Commercial

6. Vacant

7. No of Dwelling Units
8. Sewers on Premises
10. Exposed Garbage
11. Animal Food

12. Other Food & Plants
13. Standing Water

14. Condensate

15. Leaks

16. Abandoned Vehicles

Remarks (continue on back of form as necessary):




Page 253: Appendix B—Selecting a Random
Sample

Suppose there is a finite population from which we wish
to draw random sample of N elements. One method of
creating a random sample would be to assign a number

to each number of the population (e.g,, block), put a set
of numbered tags corresponding to the elements into a
box, shake the box, and draw N tags from it. The numbers
on these N tags would correspond to the elements to be
selected. This method could be satisfactory, but it would
require considerable labor to prepare the tags.

Instead of preparing numbered tags, we can use a table
of random numbers. Such a table consists of numbers
chosen in a fashion similar to drawing numbered tags
out of a box. The table is so created that all numbers 0,
1... 9 appear with approximately the same frequency.
By combining numbers in pairs, we have numbers from
00 to 99; by combining the numbers three at a time we
have numbers from 000 to 999. The numbers can be
combined as much as necessary.

Table B-1 is a table of random numbers that can be
used to select a random sample. The starting point in
the table should be selected randomly; one method is
to close your eyes and place your finger on a page of the
table.

Example

To select at random 20 blocks from a total population
of 427 blocks in the area to be surveyed, assign the
numbers 1 through 427 to the 427 blocks. To assign
these numbers, use a map of the area so that each block
is clearly defined.

Because 427 is a three digit number, combine three
columns in the table and read them together. (For a
two-digit number, combine and read two columns; for
a four-digit number, combine and read four columns.)
A column is a single-digit list of vertical numbers. In
this table, columns are grouped in pairs.

¢- Select a starting point on the table randomly.

¢- Ifthe number at the starting point is 427 or
less, select the block having that number.

¢- Ifthe number of the starting point is greater,
continue down the horizontal rows until the
number 427 or less is reached, and select that
number.

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

¢- In either case, continue down the rows and, if
necessary, down the columns beginning at the
top of the page until 20 numbers of 427 or
less have been located.

¢- This list will be the 20 blocks surveyed.

NOTES: Ignore any number over 427 because only 427
blocks exist in the total population to be surveyed. Having
the same number 427 or less more than once does not
matter. Continue until 20 numbers are selected.

Assuming 20 blocks will be chosen from a total
population of 427 blocks, the selection process can be
illustrated as follows:

¢- Suppose the randomly chosen starting point
is the number formed by vertical columns
25-27 (remember that each digit is a column)
in the 28th horizontal row of the third page of
random numbers (page B-4).

¢- This number is 724, which is more than
427, so continue down the same columns
by horizontal row until the number 081 is
reached. Block 81 would be the first block

chosen.

The other 19 blocks chosen would be 361, 373, 61 (ignore
533 because it is over 427), 164, 224, 118 (ignore 876 and
948), 300, 9 (ignore 565 and 613), 140 (ignore 724, 453, and
717), 38 (move to the top of the page, vertical columns
28-30 for the remaining numbers) 401, 225, 233, 328, 5,
184, 117, 376, and 114.

¢- The last nine blocks chosen (beginning with
401) are found in the numbers formed by
combining columns 28-30 in row 1 on the
same page.

B-1



Page 254: Table B-1. Random Numbers Table

60 06 47 98 21 58 56 49 Ol 56
51 81 17 58 66 30 25 87 71 58
11 18 29 73 #19 41 31 89 19 46
58 88 55 05 34 64 70 94 96 64
39 67 26 49 19 64 88 49 12 25
32 28 93 65 47 82 15 40 03 55

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys



Page 255: Table B-1. Random Numbers Table

87 69 76 54 25 83 30 47 87 68
85 86 90 10 02 23 92 43 61 33
17 81 10 27 04 24 25 89 23 88
90 05 48 61 28 81 07 46 75 44
76 53 45 31 94 96 69 74 02 44
09 12 33 32 61 25 93 71 71 70

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys



Page 256: Table B-1. Random Numbers Table

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys B-4



Page 257: Table B-1. Random Numbers Table

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys



Page 258: Table B-1. Random Numbers Table

95 97 43
79 61 20

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

65,
58
24
47
32
63



Page 259: Table B-1. Random Numbers Table

96 62
07 «71
79 50
61 29
94 93
55 13

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

18
76
97
Wy
80
54

52
84
40
12
56
51

36
72
12
47
59
19

73




Page 260: Table B-1. Random Numbers Table

93 63 98 33

Integrated Pest Management: Conducting Urban Rodent Surveys

39
13
15
92
64
59

36



Page 261: 5/11/24, 2:07 PM Lead in Consumer Products | Sources of Lead | CDC.

Espafiol | Other Languages

Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Home

Lead in Consumer Products

Lead can be found in some consumer products made in other countries and then imported into the United
States. Lead can also be found in collectible items no longer produced in the U.S. but passed down through
the generations.

New Fact Sheet: Recalls of Children’s Products, Foods, Cosmetics, and Medicines Due to Lead Hazards.

Some toys, especially those that are imported or are antique toys, and toy jewelry may contain lead.

e Imported Toys. Toys made in other countries are more likely to contain lead than toys made in, for example, the
United States, Canada, or the European Union.' Lead paint was banned for use in house paint, on products marketed

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/consumer-products.htm 1/3,



Page 262: 5/11/24, 2:07 PM Lead in Consumer Products | Sources of Lead | CDC.
to children, and on dishes or cookware in the United States in 1978. However, it is still widely used in many other
countries.

e Antique Toys. Toys made before the ban on lead paint in 1978 may contain lead-based paint. Therefore, painted
antiques or collectible toys that are passed down through generations may contain lead. Additionally, older toys made
of tin, brass, or pewter alloys may contain lead.

e Jewelry. Lead is often used in jewelry, including children’s jewelry, to make the product heavier, brighten colors, and
stabilize or soften plastic.234 Jewelry labeled as made in the United States is less likely to contain lead compared with
jewelry made abroad and purchased through informal and unregulated sources. Children should not be allowed to
wear jewelry that may contain lead because of exposure from chewing, sucking on, or swallowing jewelry.

e Plastic Toys and Other Products. The use of lead in plastics has not been banned. Lead is used to soften plastic and
to make it more flexible so that it can go back to its original shape. It may also be used in plastic toys to stabilize
molecules from heat.? When the plastic is exposed to sunlight, air, or detergents, the chemical bond between the lead
and plastics breaks down and forms a dust. A young child may touch the plastic toy and then ingest the dust when
putting their fingers in their mouth.

e Lead is also used in making alloys with other elements such as antimony, tin, arsenic, and calcium that may be used in
toys.

Lead in Antique and Vintage Items (other than toys)

Lead may be found in antique and vintage products purchased at thrift stores, flea markets, garage sales, antique shops,
or online. It may also be found in items that are passed down through generations. These items were often made before
current federal regulations on lead went into effect in 1978.

The following antique and vintage items may contain lead:

e Dishware

e Painted tin panels
e Lead crystal pieces
e Ceramic items

e Silverware

e Jewelry

e Furniture

Preventing Lead Exposure

The good news is that childhood lead poisoning is preventable. Do not let children play with recalled toys, toys
manufactured before 1978, and vintage and antique products because older toys and other products may contain lead-

based paint. Get information on recalls from the Consumer Products Safety Commission (CPSC [4 ) website or 1-800-638-
2772.

Testing Products for Lead
You can test products for lead by submitting a sample to a certified laboratory. Only a certified laboratory can accurately

test products for lead content. Although do-it-yourself kits are available, they do not show how much lead is present.
Additionally, their reliability in detecting low lead levels has not been determined.

Testing Children for Lead Exposure
If you think your child has been exposed to a product containing lead, contact your child's healthcare provider. Most

children who are exposed to lead have no symptoms. A blood lead test is the best way to tell if your child has been
exposed. Your healthcare provider can help you decide whether a blood lead test is needed. A healthcare provider can

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/consumer-products.htm



Page 263: 5/11/24, 2:07 PM Lead in Consumer Products | Sources of Lead | CDC.

also recommend appropriate follow-up actions if your child has been exposed. As the amount of lead in the blood
increases, adverse effects from lead may also increase.

Additional resources
Responding to Recalls and News Alerts of Lead in Children’s Products

Fact Sheet: Recalls of Children’s Products, Foods, Cosmetics, and Medicines Due to Lead Hazards
Lead Hazards in Toys

Lead in Foods, Cosmetics and Medicines

State and Local Programs

FDA Recalls, Market Withdrawals, & Safety Alerts [4

CPSC Recalls [4
New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene: Hazardous Consumer Products 4

References

1. Snyder M, Carfagno B. Chinese Product Safety: A Persistent Challenge to U.S. Regulators and Importers. U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission. March 23, 2017.

2. Ahmid K, Specht A, Morikawa L, Ceballos D, Wylie S. Lead and other toxic metals in plastic play foods: Results from
testing citizen science, lead detection tools in childcare settings. [47 Journal of Environmental Management. 2022; 321.

3. Greenway J, Gerstenberger S. An Evaluation of Lead Contamination in Plastic Toys Collected from Day Care Centers in
the Las Vegas Valley, Nevada, USA. [4 Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology. 2010; 85, 363-366.

4, Lead in Jewelry. [4 California Department of Toxic Substances Control.

5. Njati S, Maguta M, Lead-based paints and children’s PVC toys are potential sources of domestic lead poisoning - A
review. Environmental Pollution. 2019; 249, 1091-1105.

6. Snyder M, Carfagno B. Chinese Product Safety: A Persistent Challenge to U.S. Regulators and Importers. U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission. March 23, 2017.

7. Ahmid K, Specht A, Morikawa L, Ceballos D, Wylie S. Lead and other toxic metals in plastic play foods: Results from
testing citizen science, lead detection tools in childcare settings. [47 Journal of Environmental Management. 2022; 321.

8. Greenway J, Gerstenberger S. An Evaluation of Lead Contamination in Plastic Toys Collected from Day Care Centers in
the Las Vegas Valley, Nevada, USA. [4 Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology. 2010; 85, 363-366.

9. Lead in Jewelry. [4 California Department of Toxic Substances Control.

10. Njati S, Maguta M, Lead-based paints and children’s PVC toys are potential sources of domestic lead poisoning - A
review. Environmental Pollution. 2019; 249, 1091-1105.

Last Reviewed: June 23, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/consumer-products.htm



Page 264: 5/11/24, 2:05 PM Lead in Drinking Water | Sources of Lead | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Home

Lead in Drinking Water

The most common sources of lead in drinking water are lead pipes, faucets, and plumbing fixtures. Certain pipes that
carry drinking water from the water source to the home may contain lead. Household plumbing fixtures, welding solder,
and pipe fittings made prior to 1986 may also contain lead.

How lead gets into tap water

Steps taken during the last two decades have reduced exposures to lead in tap water. These steps include actions taken
under requirements of the 1986 and 1996 amendments to the Safe Drinking Water Act [4 and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency's (EPA's) Lead and Copper Rule. [4 Even so, lead in water can come from homes with lead service lines
that connect the home to the main water line. Homes without lead service lines may still have brass or chrome-plated
brass faucets, galvanized iron pipes or other plumbing soldered with lead. Some drinking water fountains with lead-lined
tanks and other plumbing fixtures not intended for drinking water (e.g., lab faucets, hoses, spigots, hand washing sinks)

may also have lead in the water.

Lead can enter drinking water when a chemical reaction occurs in plumbing materials that contain lead. This is known as
corrosion - dissolving or wearing away of metal from the pipes and fixtures. This reaction is more severe when water has
high acidity or low mineral content. How much lead enters the water is related to:

e the acidity or alkalinity of the water,

e the types and amounts of minerals in the water,

e the amount of lead that water comes into contact with,
e the water temperature,

e the amount of wear in the pipes,

e how long the water stays in pipes, and

e the presence of protective scales or coatings in the pipes.

Find out if your tap water is contaminated with lead

You cannot see, taste, or smell lead in drinking water. The best way to know your risk of exposure to lead in drinking
water is to identify the potential sources of lead in your service line and household plumbing.

Your local water authority is always your first source for testing and identifying lead contamination in your tap water. Ask
your water provider if you have a lead service line providing water to your home. If you have a lead service line, ask if

there are any programs to assist with removal of the lead service line going to your home. Understand that any work,

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/water.htm

113



Page 265: 5/11/24, 2:05 PM Lead in Drinking Water | Sources of Lead | CDC

such as water main or service line replacement, could increase exposure to lead while the work is ongoing and for up to
six months after the work is completed.

Ask to have your water tested. Many public water systems will test drinking water for residents upon request. There are
also laboratories that are certified to test for lead in water. Understand that water sampling results can vary depending
on the time of day, season, method of sampling, flow of water and other factors.

Risk from lead in water

Because no safe blood level has been identified for young children, all sources of lead exposure for children should be
controlled or eliminated. EPA has set the maximum contaminant level goal for lead in drinking water at zero because lead
can be harmful to human health even at low exposure levels. Lead is a toxic metal that is persistent in the environment
and can accumulate in the body over time. Risk will vary depending on the individual, the chemical conditions of the
water, and the amount consumed. For example, infants who drink formula prepared with lead-contaminated tap water
may be at a higher risk of exposure because of the large volume of water they consume relative to their body

size. Bathing and showering should be safe for you and your children because human skin does not absorb lead in water.

Get your child tested for lead exposure

If you think that you or your child has been exposed to lead in water, contact your health care provider. Most children
and adults who are exposed to lead have no symptoms. The best way to tell if you or your child has been exposed is with
a blood lead test. Your health care provider can help you decide whether a blood lead test is needed and can also
recommend appropriate follow-up actions if you or your child has been exposed. As levels of lead in the blood increase,
adverse effects from lead may also increase.

Reduce or eliminate exposure to lead in tap water

If you are concerned about lead in water or know that your plumbing contains lead, you can take action to reduce the
amount of lead in your drinking water and minimize your potential for exposure.

e You can reduce your exposure to lead in tap water by drinking or using only tap water that has been run through a
“point-of-use” filter certified by an independent testing organization [4 to reduce lead (NSF/ANSI standard 53 for lead
removal and NSF/ANSI standard 42 for particulate removal). If you have a lead service line, reduce your exposure with

a filter for water you use for drinking or cooking.

e Drink or cook only with water that comes out of the tap cold. Water that comes out of the tap warm or hot can have
higher levels of lead. Boiling this water will not reduce the amount of lead in your water.

e You can virtually eliminate your exposure to lead in water by drinking or using only bottled water that has
been certified by an independent testing organization. [4 This may not be the most cost-effective option for long-
term use.

Additional Resources

All Children Can Be Exposed to Lead - real-world examples of situations where children have been exposed to lead.
(Printable PDF ~& [PDF - 1 MB})

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)

e Basic Information about Lead in Drinking Water 4

¢ Contact Information for Certification Programs and Certified Laboratories for Drinking Water 4
e Drinking Water Requirements for States and Public Water Systems [%

e Infographic: Lead in Drinking Water, 4 in English BB [PDF 580 KB] [4% and en Espafol. 4

¢ National Lead Laboratory Accreditation Program List 4

e Safe Drinking Water Act: Consumer Confidence Reports 4

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/water.htm



Page 266: 5/11/24, 2:05 PM Lead in Drinking Water | Sources of Lead | CDC

Michigan's Revised Lead and Copper Rule [4 - more information about how to protect your family from lead in water.

Last Reviewed: February 28, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/water.htm 3/3



Page 267: 5/11/24, 2:07 PM Lead in Foods, Cosmetics, and Medicines | Sources of Lead | CDC

Lead in Foods, Cosmetics, and Medicines

Lead is sometimes found in certain foods, cosmetics, and traditional medicines imported from other countries.

How you or your child may be exposed

Lead has been found in some candies. Certain candy ingredients such as chili powder and tamarind may be a source of
lead exposure. Lead can get into the candy when drying, storing, and grinding the ingredients are done improperly. Ink
from plastic or paper candy wrappers may also contain lead that leaches or seeps into the imported candy. Lead has also
been found in certain spices [4 imported from Vietnam, India, and Syria among other countries.

Lead has been found in powders and tablets given for arthritis, infertility, upset stomach, menstrual cramps, colic, and
other illnesses traditionally used by East Indian, Indian, Middle Eastern, West Asian, and Hispanic cultures. Traditional
medicines can contain herbs, minerals, metals, or animal products that are thought to be useful in treating some
ailments. Lead and other heavy metals may be added or accidentally get into the products during grinding, during
coloring, or from the package.

Lead has also been found in products typically used as cosmetics or in religious ceremonies. Children and adults have
been exposed to high levels of lead by ingesting a product generically called “sindoor.” Though not intended to be food,

sindoor might be used by some as a food additive. Traditionally, Hindu, and some Sikh, married women wear the red
sindoor powder in the parting of their hair to indicate marital status.

Some items known to contain lead
Ba-baw-san is a Chinese herbal remedy that contains lead. It is used to treat colic pain or to pacify young children.

Daw Tway is a digestive aid used in Thailand and Myanmar (Burma). Analysis of Daw Tway samples showed them to
contain as much as 970 parts per million (ppm) of lead.

Greta and Azarcon (also known as alarcon, coral, luiga, maria luisa, or rueda) are Hispanic traditional medicines taken for
an upset stomach (empacho), constipation, diarrhea, and vomiting. They are also used on teething babies. Greta and

Azarcon are both fine orange powders with lead content as high as 90%.

Ghasard, an Indian folk medicine, has also been found to contain lead. It is a brown powder used as a tonic.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/foods-cosmetics-medicines.htm



Page 268: 5/11/24, 2:07 PM Lead in Foods, Cosmetics, and Medicines | Sources of Lead | CDC

Kajal (also known as kohl and surma), an eye care product used in parts of Africa and the Middle East, may contain high
levels of lead.

Sindoor. Testing of the Swad brand sindoor product found that it contained very high levels of lead, sometimes as high as
87%.

Prevent lead exposure

You cannot tell if a food, candy, spice, medicine or cosmetic contains lead by looking at or tasting it. People selling these
products may not know if the products contain lead. Consuming even small amounts of lead can be harmful and lead
poisoning from these items can cause illness or death.

You only can tell for sure if certain foods, candies, spices, cosmetics, and traditional medicines or ceremonial powders
contain lead by having them tested in a laboratory. It is best to avoid the use of products that may contain lead.

Get your child tested for lead exposure

If you think that you or your child has been exposed to lead in food, candy, spices, cosmetics, or traditional medicines,
contact your health care provider. Most children and adults who are exposed to lead have no symptoms. The best way to
tell if you or your child has been exposed is with a blood lead test. Your health care provider can help you decide whether
a blood lead test is needed and can also recommend appropriate follow-up actions if you or your child has been exposed.
As levels of lead in the blood increase, adverse effects from lead may also increase.

Additional resources

Refugees and Other Newcomer Persons Resettled to the United States
U.S. Food and Drug Administration

e Lead in Cosmetics 4
e Lead in Food, Foodwares, and Dietary Supplements 4

e Recalls, Market Withdrawals, & Safety Alerts 4
Hazardous Consumer Products [4 (New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene)

e Brochure: South Asians and Lead Poisoning BB [PDF - 745 KB] 4
Other Languages: “ge BB [PDF - 771 KB] % | fé-dt BB [PDF-757 KB] % | 95)! BB [PDF-676 kB] &
e Lead in Kohl, Kajal and Surma B& [PDF- 517 KB] 4
Other Languages: @ig-1 BB [PDF - 595 KB] /% | fé-dl BB [PDF-589KB] / | 95)! BB [PDF-617 KB] 4
¢ Kohl Health Warning Sign B&B [PDF - 643 KB] 4

“Kajal (Kohl) - A dangerous cosmetic” [4 (National Institute of Health)

Page last reviewed: May 17, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/foods-cosmetics-medicines.htm



Page 269: 5/11/24, 2:07 PM Lead in Jobs, Hobbies, or Other Activities | Lead | CDC

fi DC Centers for Disease —
My Control and Prevention

Lead in Jobs, Hobbies, or Other Activities

Some adults work in industries or have hobbies that expose them to lead. These adults may bring lead home with them
and expose their families to lead without knowing. This dust can be tracked onto carpets, floors, furniture, and other
surfaces that a child may touch.

How you or your child may be exposed

Below is a list of jobs and hobbies or other activities that may involve exposure to lead hazards.

Jobs that may involve exposure to lead hazards

e Abatement and cleanup of residential and commercial buildings, steel structures, or environmental sites
¢ Demolition of buildings and structures

e Fabrication of artistic or individual products (e.g., mixing or applying leaded ceramic glaze, glasswork, and stain glass
windows)

e Manufacturing of products containing or coated with lead (e.g., metal equipment parts, batteries, bullets, circuits)
e Melting of products containing lead (e.g., secondary smelting [scrap metal], incinerators, foundries/casting)

e Industrial mineral processing activities, such as mining, extraction, or smelting

e Painting or sanding on industrial equipment and steel structures (e.g., bridges and water towers)

e Recycling materials (e.g., stripping electronics)

e Repair, renovation, remodeling, and/or painting of residential and commercial buildings

e Use of firearms or working at a firing range (e.g., law enforcement, military, private industry, and training)

e Welding and cutting (small scale melting)

Hobbies that may involve exposure to lead hazards

¢ Casting or soldering (e.g., bullets, fishing weights, stained glass)

e Mixing or applying glaze or pigments containing lead

¢ Conducting home renovation, repair, remodeling, or painting (in structures built prior to 1978)
e Shooting firearms during target practice

e Drinking home-distilled liquids (e.g., moonshine)

¢ Consuming complementary, alternative, or traditional medicines or using cosmetics or ceremonial powders that may
contain lead

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/jobs-hobbies-activities.htm

1/2



Page 270: 5/11/24, 2:07 PM Lead in Jobs, Hobbies, or Other Activities | Lead | CDC

Other activities that may involve exposure to lead hazards

e Pica (eating of non-food items containing lead)

e Having retained bullets from gunshot wounds

Get your child tested for lead exposure

If you think that you or your child has been exposed to lead from your job or hobbies, then contact your health care
provider. Most children and adults who are exposed to lead have no symptoms. The only way to tell if you or your child
has been exposed is with a blood lead test. Your health care provider can help you decide whether a blood lead test is

needed and can also recommend appropriate follow-up actions if you or your child has been exposed. As levels of lead in
the blood increase, adverse effects from lead may also increase.

Additional Resources

National Institute for Occupational Health and Safety (NIOSH) - information on occupational exposure to lead.

Page last reviewed: February 2, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/jobs-hobbies-activities.htm



Page 271: 5/11/24, 2:05 PM Lead in Paint | Sources of Lead | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Home

Lead in Paint

Lead-based paint and lead-contaminated dust are some of the most widespread and hazardous sources of lead exposure
for young children in the United States. Approximately 29 million housing units have lead-based paint hazards including
deteriorated paint and lead-contaminated house dust. About 2.6 million of these are home to young children.

How children may be exposed

Lead-based paints were banned for residential use in 1978. Homes built in the U.S. before 1978 are likely to have some
lead-based paint. When the paint peels and cracks, it makes lead paint chips and dust. Any surface covered with lead-
based paint where the paint may wear by rubbing or friction is likely to cause lead dust including windows, doors, floors,
porches, stairways, and cabinets.

Children can be exposed to lead if they chew on surfaces coated with lead-based paint, such as window sills and door
edges. They can also be exposed if they eat flaking paint chips or eat or breathe in lead dust.

Find out if your home has lead-based paint

You can get a lead paint inspection and/or a risk assessment [4 to find out whether there is lead in your home.

A lead paint inspection tells you the lead content of every painted structural part (doors, walls, windows, etc.) of your
home. However, it won't tell you whether the paint is a hazard or how you should deal with it.

A risk assessment tells you if there are any serious lead hazards, such as peeling paint and lead dust, and what actions to
take to address these hazards.

Get your child tested for lead exposure

If you think that your child has been exposed to lead paint or dust, contact your child’s health care provider. Most
children who are exposed to lead have no symptoms. The best way to tell if your child has been exposed is with a blood
lead test. Your health care provider can help you decide whether a blood lead test is needed and can also recommend
appropriate follow-up actions if your child has been exposed. As levels of lead in the blood increase, adverse effects from
lead may also increase.

Reduce or eliminate exposure to lead paint and dust

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/paint.htm 1/2



Page 272: 5/11/24, 2:05 PM Lead in Paint | Sources of Lead | CDC
If your home is built before 1978:

e Ask your state or local health department about testing paint and dust from your home for lead.
e Make sure your child does not have access to peeling paint or chewable surfaces painted with lead-based paint.

e If you have peeling or chipping lead-based paint, have it removed by qualified professionals. [4 There are standards
for certifying lead-based paint professionals to ensure the work is done safely, reliably, and effectively.

e Make sure to renovate safely. Common renovation activities (like sanding, cutting, replacing windows, and more) can
create hazardous lead dust. If you're planning renovations, use contractors certified [4 by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA).

e Keep children and pregnant people away from housing undergoing renovation and from participating in activities that
disturb old paint or in cleaning up paint debris after work is completed.

e Create barriers between living/play areas and lead sources until environmental clean-up is completed. You can apply

barriers, such as contact paper or duct tape, to cover holes in walls or to temporarily block children’s access to sources
of lead.

e Regularly wash children’s hands that can become contaminated from household dust or exterior soil.

e Regularly wet-mop floors and horizontal surfaces because household dust can be a major source of lead. Window sills
and wells can also contain high levels of leaded dust, so they should also be kept free of dust.

Additional CDC Resources
Learn more about home exposures with these fact sheets and flyers.

All Children Can Be Exposed to Lead - real-world examples of situations where children have been exposed to lead.
(Printable PDF 28 [PDF - 1 MB])

Printable flyers

e Lead in Soil [PDF - 523 KB]

e Window Replacement [PDF - 448 KB]

e Kitchen Renovation [PDF - 438 KB]

Additional Resources

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
¢ Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes [4
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)

e Infographic: Lead-Based Paint in the Home A [4

e Lead Abatement, Inspection, and Risk Assessment [4

e Lead-Safe Certified Guide to Renovate Right 4

e Protect Your Family from Lead in Your Home [4

¢ Renovation, Repair and Painting Program: Do-lt-Yourselfers [4

e Video: Lead-Based Paint PSA

Last Reviewed: December 16, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/paint.htm

2/2



Page 273: 5/11/24, 2:06 PM Lead in Soil | Sources of Lead | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Home

Lead in Soil

Lead-contaminated soil continues to be a hazardous source of lead exposure for young children in the United States.
Deposits from leaded gasoline, exterior lead-based paint, and industrial sources have contributed to increased levels of
lead in the soil. This is especially common in urban areas and homes built before 1978.

How children may be exposed

I
e Children can be exposed to lead in soil by swallowing or breathing in lead-contaminated soil while playing.

e Lead-contaminated soil particles can also be brought inside as lead dust or on shoes, clothing, or pets.
e Young children tend to put their hands, which may be contaminated with lead dust from soil, into their mouths.

e¢ Some young children eat soil (this is called pica). Children may also be exposed to lead by eating fruits and vegetables
grown in or near lead-contaminated soil.

Get your child tested for lead exposure

If you think that your child has been exposed to lead in soil contact your child's health care provider. Most children who
are exposed to lead have no symptoms. The best way to tell if your child has been exposed is with a blood lead test. Your
health care provider can help you decide whether a blood lead test is needed and can also recommend appropriate
follow-up actions if your child has been exposed. As levels of lead in the blood increase, adverse effects from lead may
also increase.

Reduce or eliminate exposure to lead in soil

e Take off shoes when entering the house to prevent bringing lead-contaminated soil in from outside.

e Prevent children from playing in bare soil. If possible, provide them with sandboxes. Cover sandboxes when not in use
to prevent cats from using it as a litter box.

e Plant grass on areas of bare soil or cover the soil with grass seed, mulch, or wood chips, if possible. Until the bare soil
is covered, move play areas away from bare soil and away from the sides of the house.

e Do not grow fruits or vegetables in lead-contaminated soil. Using a container garden is a good alternative.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/soil.htm 1/2



Page 274: 5/11/24, 2:06 PM Lead in Soil | Sources of Lead | CDC
Risk from lead in artificial turf

The risk for harmful lead exposure is low from new fields with elevated lead levels in their turf fibers. This is because the
turf fibers are still intact and the lead is unlikely to be available for harmful exposures to occur. As the turf ages and
weathers, lead is released in dust that could then be ingested or inhaled, and the risk for harmful exposure increases. If
exposures do occur, CDC currently does not know how much lead the body will absorb.

Some artificial turf playing fields may also contain potentially unhealthy levels of lead dust. Artificial turf made of nylon or
nylon/polyethylene blend fibers contains levels of lead that pose a potential public health concern. Tests of artificial turf
fields made with only polyethylene fibers showed that these fields contained very low levels of lead.

Fields that are old, that are used frequently, and that are exposed to the weather break down into dust as the turf fibers
are worn or show signs of weathering, including fibers that are abraded, faded or broken. These factors should be
considered when evaluating the potential for harmful lead exposures from a given field.

Additional Resources

e All Children Can Be Exposed to Lead - real-world examples of situations where children have been exposed to lead.
(Printable PDF —& [PDF - 1 MB))

e Federal Research on Recycled Tire Crumb Used on Playing Fields [4 - a coordinated effort by federal agencies to
study key environmental and human health questions about risks from artificial turf.

e Lead in Soil B8 [PDF - 195 KB] [4 - information about lead-contaminated soil from the Environmental Protection
Agency.
e Soil Screening, Health, Outreach and Partnership (soilSHOP) - health education and outreach events for lead in soil by

the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR). The soilSHOP events help people learn if their soil is
contaminated with lead and how to reduce exposures to contaminated soil and produce.

Last Reviewed: December 16, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources/soil.htm



Page 275: 5/11/24, 4:13 PM Lifestyle Risk Factors | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Centers for Disease —
Control and Prevention

Lifestyle Risk Factors

We Track That

Lifestyle risk factor data on the Tracking Network can be used by public health professionals to determine if certain health
outcomes are related to the environment or if they could also be due to lifestyle risk factors such as smoking and lack of
physical activity. The data can also be used by public health officials to determine the best public health actions to reduce
modifiable lifestyle risk factors in their communities.

Types of Data

The Tracking Network hosts the following lifestyle risk factor data. Data sources include CDC's Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System, CDC's Population Level Analysis and Community Estimates (PLACES) Project, and the U.S. Census Bureau
(4. These data are available at the state, county, or census tract level for all 50 states.

e Alcohol Use: This indicator shows the crude and age-adjusted rates of adults who report binge drinking (men: five or
more drinks; women: four or more drinks) on one occasion within the past 30 days.

e¢ Overweight and Obesity: This indicator shows the prevalence of those who are overweight or obese.

e Physical Activity: This indicator shows the crude and age-adjusted rates of adults who report not participating in
leisure-time physical activities or exercise during the past month.

e Sleep: This indicator shows the crude and age-adjusted rates of adults who report usually getting insufficient sleep,
defined as less than 7 hours, on average, during a 24-hour period.

e¢ Smoking: This indicator shows the prevalence of current and former smokers.

Data Highlight

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/LifestyleRiskFactors.htm

114



Page 276: 5/11/24, 4:13 PM Lifestyle Risk Factors | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Each year, chronic diseases cause 7 of 10 deaths among Americans. Heart disease, cancer, and stroke account for more
than 50% of all deaths each year.

Data in Action

These data can be used to:

e Identify environmental relationships that warrant further investigation or environmental public health action

Formulate planning and evaluating efforts to reduce health burden

Show differences of prevalence between geographic areas

e Highlight populations in need of targeted interventions
Read these success stories to learn about lifestyle risk factors related work happening in our funded Tracking Programs.

Minnesota | Oregon

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/LifestyleRiskFactors.htm

2/4



Page 277: 5/11/24, 4:13 PM Lifestyle Risk Factors | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Learn More

e Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS)
e Division of Population Health

e Healthy Communities Program

¢ Office on Smoking and Health

e Prevention Research Centers

Tracking Resources

¢ Smoking, Radon, & Lung Cancer Infographic FA

Related Content Areas
e Heart Disease

e Cancer
¢ COPD

e Reproductive Birth Outcomes

Explore Lifestyle Risk Factors Data

Data Explorer

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/LifestyleRiskFactors.htm

3/4



Page 278: 5/11/24, 4:13 PM Lifestyle Risk Factors | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Corton fevge © dal ere

renee fog BH

aR men Pein om ng Be Pte et pee ge er ey ed Ea

dere rye seg eee | Pa od ce ee ee ee. rd ed ed!

dade Popesieres ary Ble | Perce col acieiy pee chee eed eit andres. wo ert Serco bee ne aed a |
Pa Pie Bl Pe ee hel ee de ed ee ee es eee ee ee ee ee ee ed ee
Berek: Peeve ra | Pairk eb A eS a 9! Wd oh
ee ee Bo ee Be al

Paar ak: Peri a ea Re, ame od eee) ieee i (Dad ea ae

dave Payee ere eee | red cd ca ee ed nr LS ad
fata"

dai Peters ere ees Peel aches i ee ee oe ee ee rerio 9 ead or es ed em acl

cme
PAST ied: Persie nhs a ies oe Peek ee i et Pome to
Cakes
dare. Pa ee es Par ot on ae ee ee
Cnicey

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/LifestyleRiskFactors.htm



Page 279: 5/11/24, 2:15 PM Mental Health and Stress-Related Disorders | CDC

CDC Centers for Disease —
betes Control and Prevention

Mental Health and Stress-Related Disorders

Mental illness is one of the major causes of suffering in the United States, and extreme weather events can affect mental
health in several ways. Following disasters, mental health problems increase, both among people with no history of mental
illness, and those at risk - a phenomenon known as “common reactions to abnormal events.” These reactions may be short-
lived or, in some cases, long-lasting. For example, research demonstrated high levels of anxiety and post-traumatic stress
disorder among people affected by Hurricane Katrina, and similar observations have followed floods and heat waves. Some
evidence suggests wildfires have similar effects. All of these events are increasingly fueled by climate change. Other health
consequences of intensely stressful exposures are also a concern, including pre-term birth, low birth weight, and maternal
complications.

In addition, some patients with mental illness are especially susceptible to heat. Suicide rates vary with weather, rising with
high temperatures, suggesting potential impacts from climate change on depression and other mental illnesses. Dementia is
a risk factor for hospitalization and death during heat waves. Patients with severe mental illness, such as schizophrenia, are at
risk during hot weather because their medications may interfere with temperature regulation or even directly cause
hyperthermia. Additional potential mental health impacts, less well understood, include the possible distress associated with
environmental degradation and displacement and the anxiety and despair that knowledge of climate change might elicit in
some people.

CDC Mental Health and Stress-Related Disorders Resources:

e Mental Health - information, data, and tools/resources on mental health topics

¢ Coping with a Disaster or Traumatic Event - resources for children, state and local governments, community leaders, and
emergency responders

e NIOSH Traumatic Incident Stress - guidance for emergency workers involved in response activities
Page last reviewed: June 18, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/mental_health_disorders.htm#print



Page 280: 5/11/24, 3:01 PM National Chemical and Radiological Surveillance Program | Health Studies Program: Chemical Exposures | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Health Studies

Health Studies Home

National Chemical and Radiological Surveillance
Program

CDC works with poison centers to protect the nation from public health threats.

Learn how public health surveillance identifies and responds to incidents of public health significance from poison center
data with this flowchart BB [PDF - 502 KB].

Roughly every 8 minutes, call data from poison centers across the country are uploaded to a national reporting database and
electronic surveillance system called the National Poison Data System [4 (NPDS). CDC and America’s Poison Centers [4 use
the database to improve surveillance of chemical exposures and public health hazards.

Scientists from CDC and America’s Poison Centers monitor NPDS every day, watching for any data anomalies that may
represent incidents of public health significance such as outbreaks of illness. Anomalies can include an increase in the
number of calls or an increase in reports of specific signs and symptoms. When anomalies are identified, CDC and America’s

Poison Centers assist with further activities such as performing enhanced surveillance or notifying the state health
department and assisting with a public health investigation.

Anyone can alert poison centers to an exposure of concern.
The nation’s 55 poison centers help with poisoning emergencies and provide information to help prevent poisonings.

People can contact their local poison center by calling 1-800-222-1222. Individual callers will automatically be connected to the
poison center covering their area. For an online option, this interactive tool [4 prompts users to answer a few simple
questions about a human exposure to approximately 325,000 unique products and substances.

National Chemical and Radiological Surveillance Program highlights

Carbon Monoxide Exposure Surveillance During Disaster Response and Recovery Efforts
(ongoing)

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/ncrs.htm



Page 281: 5/11/24, 3:01 PM National Chemical and Radiological Surveillance Program | Health Studies Program: Chemical Exposures | CDC

Carbon monoxide (CO) is an odorless, colorless gas that can lead to sudden illness or death if inhaled at high
concentrations. After a disaster, there may be power outages which result in people using alternative sources of fuel or
electricity for heating, cooling, or cooking. These sources can lead to elevated CO levels in enclosed spaces, poisoning
people and animals inside. CDC uses NPDS [% for surveillance during disaster response and recovery efforts to track
reported exposures to CO. Using these data can help inform public health messaging to prevent further injury and death.

Identifying an Increase in Exposures to Cleaners and Disinfectants (2020)

In April 2020, MMWR published a report that described an increase in calls to poison centers about exposures to cleaners
and disinfectants. Using data from NPDS, CDC and America’s Poison Centers found that poison centers nationwide
received 45,550 calls regarding exposures to cleaners and disinfectants during the first three months of 2020 - an
increase of about 20% from the same timeframe in 2019. The timing of these reported exposures corresponded to
increased media coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic, reports of consumer shortages of cleaning and disinfection
products, and the beginning of some local and state stay-at-home orders. The results of this study highlighted the
importance of safe and appropriate use of cleaners and disinfectants to prevent potential poisonings and injuries.

Identifying Sources of Harmful Algal and Cyanobacterial Bloom Exposures (2019)

Harmful algal and cyanobacterial blooms (HABs) are the rapid growth of algae or cyanobacteria that can cause harm to
people, animals, and the environment. In 2019, CDC and America’s Poison Centers worked with five poison centers to
conduct follow-up surveys with people who had called regarding a HAB exposure. Fifty-five people were interviewed.
Most callers (65%) stated they were exposed through multiple routes with the most common being skin contact (84%)
and ingestion (60%). The most frequently reported source of exposure was bathing or swimming in contaminated water.
Few callers had heard or read warnings about the dangers of HABs before or during their exposure. This study highlights
the importance of characterizing exposures to HABs to tailor public health messaging.

Increasing Awareness of Synthetic Cannabinoids (2015 )

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/ncrs.htm 2/4



Page 282: 5/11/24, 3:01 PM National Chemical and Radiological Surveillance Program | Health Studies Program: Chemical Exposures | CDC

CDC launched an investigation in April 2015 after being alerted to an increase in poison center calls related to synthetic
cannabinoids, also known as synthetic marijuana. The results, published in MMWR, led to a surge in media coverage on
this issue that created a broader awareness of issues and dangers of using synthetic cannabinoids.

Reporting Poisoning from Electronic Cigarettes (2014)

Electronic cigarettes, or e-cigarettes, are devices that heat a liquid mixture to allow users to inhale an aerosol that
typically contains nicotine, flavorings, and other additives. While long-term impacts of these products on public health are
unknown, one area of concern is the potential for poisonings. A CDC study found that 2,405 e-cigarette exposures were
reported to poison centers from September 2010 to February 2014. This work informed public health actions including
the Child Nicotine Poisoning Prevention Act of 2015, enacted in January 2016. This law requires any container of liquid
nicotine that is sold, manufactured, distributed, or imported into the United States use packaging that is difficult for
children under 5 years of age to open.

Improving Consumer Safety for Laundry Pods (2012)

From May 17-June 17, 2012, poison centers across the country reported B§ 485 cases of children being exposed to
detergent-filled laundry pods. CDC partnered with America’s Poison Centers and poison centers in Charlotte and
Philadelphia to investigate this public health threat. Their work helped contribute to the decision by the largest
manufacturer of laundry detergent pods in the United States to add a double latch lid safety feature to their containers.
Manufacturers have also worked with poison centers to study risk factors and health outcomes linked to laundry
detergent pod exposures.

Tracking Concerns During Japan Radiological Event (2011)

CDC tracked all calls to poison centers related to the 2011 Japan nuclear event. Between March 11 and April 18, NPDS
tracked 340 information requests and 64 calls regarding potential radiation, potassium iodide and iodide product
exposures. Call details were analyzed daily for situational awareness and to inform public health response efforts. Staff
from CDC and America’s Poison Centers performed detailed follow up and data review to confirm exposure status.
Surveillance for calls related to potassium iodide (a medication used to prevent the uptake of radioactive iodine by the
thyroid) exposures documented adverse outcomes in persons taking this product in response to a perceived risk from
this event.

Oil Exposures from Deepwater Horizon Incident (2010)

During 2010, 1838 calls were received by 57 poison centers related to the Deepwater Horizon explosion and oil spill. Of
these, 1160 were self-reported exposures and symptoms, including cough, nausea, headache, eye irritation, throat
irritation, chest pain, dizziness, difficulty breathing, and rash. The data were used to identify trends and monitor severity
of health effects. This information helped public health officials determine the impact of the oil spill on health.
Information was also shared with states to aid in their public health response.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/ncrs.htm



Page 283: 5/11/24, 3:01 PM National Chemical and Radiological Surveillance Program | Health Studies Program: Chemical Exposures | CDC
Additional Resources

e Emory/CDC Medical Toxicology Fellowship
e Poison Center and Public Health Collaborations Community of Practice (CoP)

e America’s Poison Centers [4

Last Reviewed: June 29, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/ncrs.htm

44



Page 284: 5/11/24, 2:11 PM National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey | Lead | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Home

National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES)

Blood Lead Levels in the U.S. Population

The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) is a population-based program of studies designed to assess
the health and nutritional status of adults and children in the United States. The updated Blood Lead, NHANES 2011-2018
table is available on CDC's National Exposure Report webpage.

Biomonitoring data from prior NHANES survey years can be found on the Biomonitoring Data Tables for Environmental
Chemicals web page. The NHANES survey is designed to provide nationally representative information for the general U.S.
population.

NHANES is conducted by CDC's National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) on a sample of the U.S. population of all ages to
reflect the nation overall, rather than individual states or counties. Beginning in 1960, and as a continuous survey since 1999,
NHANES has examined a sample of about 5,000 persons across the country with 15 selected counties visited each year. The
sampling plan follows a complex, stratified, multistage, probability-cluster design to select a nationally representative sample
of the U.S. civilian, non-institutionalized population based on age, sex, and race/ethnicity. Data on a broad range of health
topics are collected through personal household interviews, physical examinations, and laboratory tests.

Since 1976, as part of NHANES, blood lead levels in the U.S. population are measured by CDC's National Center for
Environmental Health (NCEH) Division of Laboratory Sciences using state-of-the-art methods for sample collection, quality
control, and analysis. Blood lead levels in the U.S. population overall, including children, have declined over time even in the
most high-risk areas. This is due, in large part, to successful Federal policies and an intense coordinated effort of public
health interventions aimed at reducing sources of lead in the environment. In 2012, CDC adopted the blood lead reference
value to identify children with blood lead levels that are much higher than most U.S. children. The blood lead reference value

is equal to the 97.5th percentile of the estimated blood lead distribution in children age 1-5 years old based on NHANES data.
Last Reviewed: November 18, 2021

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/data/nhanes.htm



Page 285: 5/11/24, 3:02 PM Outbreaks and Disease Clusters Related to Environmental Exposures | NCEH | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Health Studies Home

Outbreaks and Disease Clusters Related to
Environmental Exposures

CDC's Health Studies Program (HSP) provides subject matter expertise in epidemiology and medical toxicology to investigate
outbreaks and disease clusters related to environmental exposures. These non-infectious disease outbreaks and disease
clusters can be caused by exposures to toxins, chemicals, or other substances found in the environment.

Epidemiology is the study of the distribution and causes of diseases and other health outcomes in populations. Medical
toxicology is the field of medicine that focuses on the diagnosis, management, and prevention of poisoning and other adverse
health effects caused by medications, occupational and environmental toxins, radiation, and biological agents.

When outbreaks and disease clusters related to environmental exposures occur, epidemiologists and medical toxicologists
from the HSP work closely with partners to

e determine the extent of the outbreak or cluster,
e describe the illness,

e identify the etiology (cause), and

identify the source of exposure.
The HSP's partners include federal, state, local, and international public health agencies.
To help answer questions, they collect different types of data, including

e Epidemiologic data, such as who got sick, when, and where
¢ Clinical data, such as patient signs and symptoms

e Laboratory data, such as test results from biological specimens or environmental samples

HSP investigators use poison center data to identify outbreaks and disease clusters related to emerging environmental
hazards. For more information, see the National Chemical and Radiological Surveillance Program webpage.

Epidemiologic Assistance

The HSP can help investigate domestic and international outbreaks related to environmental exposures. The HSP can help in
different ways, including providing technical assistance or conducting an Epi-Aid. To reach HSP outbreak response experts,
contact ncehoutbreak@cdc.gov.

Outbreak and Disease Cluster Investigation Highlights

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/envepi/outbreaks/default.htm



Page 286: 5/11/24, 3:02 PM Outbreaks and Disease Clusters Related to Environmental Exposures | NCEH | CDC

The HSP provides technical assistance and helps develop guidance for state, tribal, local, and territorial health
departments. The guidance focuses on responding to concerns about unusual patterns of cancer and cancer clusters. A
cancer cluster is defined as a greater than expected number of the same or etiologically-related cancer cases that occurs
within a group of people in a geographic area over a specified period. Etiology refers to causes and risk factors associated
with the development of disease. Cancer cases that are “the same or etiologically related” means that the cancer cases
are of the same type, are within a family of tumors (e.g., Ewing's family of tumors), or have a known or suggested link to
the same specific environmental or chemical exposures. Health departments may request technical assistance in
response to unusual patterns of cancer and cancer clusters from HSP. For more information about unusual patterns of
cancer, visit the Unusual Patterns of Cancer, t

he Environment, and Community Concerns website.

rt

In 2022, The Gambia’s Ministry of Health requested assistance from CDC to help investigate a large cluster of acute
kidney injury (AKI) among young children. The investigation involved multiple international partners and personnel from
across CDC. The HSP provided epidemiologic and toxicological expertise to support the field team. Together, they were
able to characterize the illness, describe the epidemiology, and identify potential causes and their sources. The
investigation found that in 2022, 78 children were suspected to have AKI, and 66 died. Most patients (75%) were younger
than two years of age. After conducting interviews and analyzing medication samples, investigators found that the cause
of the illness was likely medications contaminated with diethylene glycol. Learn more in this MMWR article: Acute Kidney
Injury Among Children Likely Associated with Diethylene Glycol-Contaminated Medications — The Gambia, June-
September 2022.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/envepi/outbreaks/default.htm



Page 287: 5/11/24, 3:02 PM Outbreaks and Disease Clusters Related to Environmental Exposures | NCEH | CDC

Acute Non-Viral Hepatitis Associated with a Brand of Alkaline Water

a ee
In 2021, the HSP, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [47, the Nevada Department of Health and Human Services
[4,, and the Southern Nevada Health District 4 investigated cases of acute non-viral hepatitis with an unknown cause in
Nevada and surrounding states. Acute non-viral hepatitis is liver inflammation that occurs suddenly and can lead to liver
failure. The investigation found 21 probable cases and four suspected cases of acute non-viral hepatitis linked to
consuming “Real Water,” a brand of alkaline water. Eighteen probable cases and four suspected cases were identified in
Nevada, and three probable cases were identified in California. Learn more about the investigation: Acute Nonviral

Hepatitis Associated with a Brand of Alkaline Water.

Synthetic Cannabinoids

The HSP has worked with CDC’s National Center for Injury Prevention and Control to respond to numerous outbreaks of
illnesses related to synthetic cannabinoids. Synthetic cannabinoid products usually consist of various man-made
chemicals. Reported side effects from these products are often severe and can include kidney failure, heart attack, and
death. Learn more about CDC's work on synthetic cannabinoids: Synthetic Cannabinoids: What CDC is Doing.

Liver Failure Associated with Dietary Supplements

On September 9, 2013, the Hawaii Department of Health (HDOH) was notified by a hospital that it had observed seven
patients with acute hepatitis and liver failure of unknown cause. All patients reported using a dietary supplement
marketed for weight loss and muscle gain. As a result, HDOH requested assistance from the HSP and the FDA to identify
other illnesses, describe common clinical features, and characterize risk factors for illness. In all, investigators identified
92 cases of acute hepatitis of unknown cause. Learn more about the investigation: Liver Failure Linked to Dietary
Supplements.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/envepi/outbreaks/default.htm



Page 288: 5/11/24, 3:02 PM

Outbreaks and Disease Clusters Related to Environmental Exposures | NCEH | CDC

In 2007, the Ethiopia Ministry of Health and Ethiopia Health and Nutrition Research Institute asked the HSP and other
partners to help investigate an outbreak of an unidentified liver disease. After conducting an extensive investigation, the

cause of the outbreak was found to be exposure to toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Learn more about the investigation:
Unidentified Liver Disease Ethiopia.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/envepi/outbreaks/default.htm

45



Page 289: 5/11/24, 3:02 PM Outbreaks and Disease Clusters Related to Environmental Exposures | NCEH | CDC

Aflatoxin is a fungal toxin that commonly contaminates maize and other crops during production, harvest, storage, or
processing. Exposure to aflatoxin is known to cause both chronic and acute liver injury. In May 2006, an outbreak of acute
aflatoxicosis was reported in a region of Kenya where aflatoxin contamination of homegrown maize was a recurring
problem. CDC teams worked with the Kenyan Ministry of Health to test a rapid, portable aflatoxin screening tool that
could be used in the field during an outbreak. The tool helps identify contaminated maize and helps with urgent maize

Fale \7o8s
" easy, >
—_ 4748

replacement efforts. Learn more about the investigation: Aflatoxin.

h

Additional Resources

Toxicological Outbreak Investigation Course and Toolkit »

National Chemical and Radiological Surveillance Program >

Last Reviewed: August 10, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/hsb/envepi/outbreaks/default.htm

5/5



Page 290: 5/11/24, 2:04 PM Overview of Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention | Lead | CDC
Espafiol | Other Languages

CDC Centers for Disease —
2° Control and Prevention

Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Home

Overview of Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention

Lead is a naturally occurring metal that can cause negative health effects. People are exposed to lead by eating lead paint
chips, ingesting contaminated food or water, and/or by breathing in lead dust. Children younger than 6 years are more
likely to be exposed due to their hand-to-mouth behavior. Many children ingest lead dust by putting objects such as toys
and dirt in their mouths.

No safe blood lead level (BLL) in children has been identified and even low levels of lead in blood are associated with
developmental delays, difficulty learning, and behavioral issues. The effects of lead poisoning can be permanent and
disabling.

There are steps that parents and healthcare providers can take to protect children from lead exposure. Healthcare
providers can perform a blood lead test if a child was or may have been exposed to lead.

CDC uses a blood lead reference value (BLRV) of 3.5 micrograms per deciliter (ug/dL) to identify children with BLLs higher
than most children’s levels. CDC estimates that approximately 500,000 children in the United States have BLLs at or above
the BLRV. For BLLs higher than the BLRV, healthcare providers can use CDC’s Recommended Actions Based on Blood

Lead Level to develop a plan of action for their patient. More information about sources of exposure, risk factors, testing
and prevention is provided below.

Where Children Are Exposed

Children can be exposed to lead where they live, learn, and play. Sources of lead exposure can include the following:

e Chipping or peeling paint in homes or buildings built before 1978

Water from lead pipes

e Soil near airports, highways, or factories

Some imported candies and traditional medicines

e¢ Some imported toys and jewelry

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/overview.html



Page 291: 5/11/24, 2:04 PM Overview of Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention | Lead | CDC

e Certain jobs and hobbies

Risk Factors

Some children are at a greater risk for lead exposure from paint, water, soil, some imported items such as traditional
medicines and herbs, industrial sources, and from certain jobs and hobbies (through their parents and caregivers). More
information can be found on the Populations at Higher Risk web page.

Testing for Lead Exposure

A blood lead test is the best way to determine if a child has been exposed to lead. Parents can talk to their healthcare
provider to find out if a blood lead test is needed. Healthcare providers can recommend follow-up actions and care based
on the child’s BLL.

To find out if a home has lead, hire a certified lead inspector to test for lead. Visit the Environmental Protection Agency's
Locate Certified Inspection, Risk Assessment, and Abatement Firms [4 web page to locate one. Renters can ask their

landlord to have the home inspected or to share results of recently conducted lead inspections. Visit the Lead in Drinking
Water and the Lead in Soil web pages for additional information on testing for lead in or around the home.

Prevent Childhood Lead Exposure

The goal of CDC’s Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program (CLPPP) is to prevent childhood lead exposure before
any harm occurs. Through CLPPP, CDC supports state and local public health departments with funds for surveillance and
prevention of lead exposure.

Additional Information

e HRSA-CDC Letter on Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention and Blood Lead Testing BA [PDF - 213 KB]
e Lead FAQs

e Sources of Lead Exposure

e Health Effects of Lead Exposure

e Blood Lead Levels in Children

e Blood Lead Levels in U.S. Children Ages 1-11 Years, 1976-2016 [4

e Data and Statistics

e Publications and Resources

Last Reviewed: October 20, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/overview.html



Page 292: 5/11/24, 4:14 PM Pesticide Exposure | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

FE eT
Etat

National Environmental Public Health Tracking
Home

Pesticide Exposure

apne ty ~*tll mae «46

People are exposed to low levels of pesticides every day in a variety of places—at home, at school, or at work. The health
risks from pesticide exposure depend on how dangerous the pesticide is, the amount a person is exposed to, how long
the exposure lasts, and the route of exposure. The Tracking Network has data from poison control centers on pesticide
exposures and related health effects to help identify trends and patterns over time and across geographies.

We Track That

The pesticide exposure data used on the Tracking Network come from poison control centers across the nation through a
partnership with the American Association of Poison Control Centers (AAPCC) [4. AAPCC works with poison centers
throughout the United States to monitor poisonings and their sources. Sources include chemicals found in household
products, the workplace, at home, and in the environment and poisonings from foods, beverages, drugs and medicines, and
animal and insect bites.

Poison control centers offer a free, confidential 24-hour telephone line (1-800-222-1222) where people can get medical advice
on poisonings. You can also access www.poisonhelp.org [4 to get information about what to do if someone has come into
contact with a poison.

Types of Data

AAPCC maintains the National Poison Data System (NPDS), the only near, real-time comprehensive poisoning exposure
surveillance database in the United States. The Tracking Network displays poison control center data from the NPDS for
poisonings by state.

Reported Pesticide Exposures

This indicator shows the number and rate (number of cases per 100,000 population) of exposures to different types of
pesticides by state and by year reported to poison control centers. Pesticides are categorized according to their
functional class: disinfectants, fumigants, fungicides, herbicides, insecticides, repellents, and rodenticides.

Advanced Options for Reported Pesticide Exposures Data

e Pesticide Exposure Site - This Advanced option shows the reason for the reported pesticide exposure.
© Residential - your home or another residence

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/PesticideExposure.htm



Page 293: 5/11/24, 4:14 PM Pesticide Exposure | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

o Workplace

© Other - any location not included in residential or workplace exposure sites, for example, school, a medical
facility, or other public place such as a restaurant

e Reason for Pesticide Exposure - This advanced option shows the rate and number of reported exposures by

location.
© Unintentional environmental - any exposure from air, water, or soil contamination

© Unintentional misuse - improper or incorrect use of a pesticide product resulting in a pesticide exposure
© Unintentional occupational - any job-related exposure

© Unintentional general - all other unintentional exposures

Pesticide-Related Illness

This indicator shows the rate and number of illnesses that resulted from the reported pesticide exposure and the
severity of the health effects. The health effects range from minor effect to death. The health outcome data groupings are
defined by the AAPCC.

e No effect - The patient did not have any signs or symptoms as a result of the exposure.

e Minor effect - The patient developed some symptoms but improved rapidly without any long-term health effects.
Examples include drowsiness, skin irritation, and mild cough.

e Moderate effect - The patient developed symptoms that lasted longer or were more serious than minor effects, but
not life threatening. Usually treatment is involved. Examples include high fever, disorientation, and low blood
pressure.

e Major effect - The patient developed life-threatening symptoms that caused serious health problems or disfigurement
as a result of the exposure. Examples include seizures, and cardiac or respiratory arrest.

e Death - The patient died as a direct result of the exposure or complication of the exposure.

e Unable to follow-potentially toxic - The patient was lost to follow-up, refused follow-up, or was not followed, but the
exposure was significant and may have resulted in a moderate or major outcome or death.

Advanced options for pesticide-related illness data are the same as those for the reported pesticide exposures indicator.

Data Highlight

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/PesticideExposure.htm

2/6



Page 294: 5/11/24, 4:14 PM Pesticide Exposure | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

=
No effect Area Womenate Manor

PR [JPG - 36 KB]

In 2017, most reported health effects from pesticide exposures were minor. Explore more pesticide exposures data on
the Tracking Network.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/PesticideExposure.htm

3/6



Page 295: 5/11/24, 4:14 PM Pesticide Exposure | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

American Association of
Poison Control Centers

1-800-222-1222
PoisonHelp.org

4

Data in Action

Tracking pesticide exposures in a standard way can help us

e identify trends over time and across different geographic areas,
e explore patterns of health effects from pesticide exposures,
e determine trends in exposure sites (work, school, or home), and

e know which pesticides are more, or less, of a problem.

Tracking the acute, or short-term, health effects related to pesticide exposures can inform public health actions like restricting
the use of certain pesticides or placing stronger language on warning labels.

Read these success stories to learn about pesticide related work in our funded Tracking Programs.

California [4 |lowa | New York City

Learn More

e Unintentional Poisoning

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/PesticideExposure.htm 4/6



Page 296: 5/11/24, 4:14 PM Pesticide Exposure | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

e Protect the Ones You Love: Poisonings

e Work-related Pesticide Illness and Injury

Tracking Resources

e Pesticide Exposures Infographic

Explore Pesticide Exposures Data

Data Explorer

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/PesticideExposure.htm

5/6



Page 297: 5/11/24, 4:14 PM

Gorter fee 6 dal eee
ree
cd eile ee cs Bb

Cas

Cnicey

Pesticide Exposure | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

mam TH

Pep mee an pees ape ead eee a a

Rater of ec ee ee ee eee. eed oe!

Pace col acheter ier edo. ic eee Sere be ne Bae) ee |
Per ee el ee ee ed eS a ees eee eee ee ee eT ad
Peco cd Mech ea eSB AH ee a ed Tn +

fe OE We Bo ee Be Dl

emcee RL eM cm a Ey A Rd rl AD ad wt +

Prard cf ca a ee i ee)
aT”

Pec aches. i ei ee oe ee oie Ook cel or. en eed ev 1! arc
oe

Wier hcl i in hPa ded el sa LT ri

Par ot on ae ee ee

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/PesticideExposure.htm

6/6



Page 298: 5/11/24, 2:09 PM Populations at Higher Risk | Lead | CDC
Espafiol | Other Languages

CDC Centers for Disease —
Y Control and Prevention

Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Home

Populations at Higher Risk

Across the United States, there are a variety of childhood lead exposure sources and risk factors.

Children from low-income households and those who live in housing built before 1978 are at the greatest risk of lead
exposure. Houses built before 1978, the time before the use of lead in paint was banned, and houses in low-income areas,
many of which have homes built before 1978, are more likely to contain lead-based paint and have pipes, faucets, and

plumbing fixtures containing lead. Also, some African American persons are at a higher risk of lead exposure due to poor
housing stock.

Children less than six years old are at a higher risk of lead exposure. This is because their bodies are rapidly developing and
more susceptible to taking in lead if exposed. Young children also tend to put their hands or other objects into their mouths.
This is why the most common source of lead exposure in young children is lead dust that they swallow after placing their lead-

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/populations.htm 1/2



Page 299: 5/11/24, 2:09 PM Populations at Higher Risk | Lead | CDC
contaminated hands or other objects in their mouths.
Immigrant and refugee children from less developed countries are at higher risk of being exposed to lead due to less strict

rules protecting children from lead exposure, in their country of origin. Because of this, children who are
immigrants, refugees, or recently adopted from less developed countries are also at risk for lead exposure.

Pregnant people should know the risk of lead exposure because lead can pass to their baby during pregnancy. Breastfeeding
can also be a source of lead exposure to babies. Adults who are or have been exposed to lead can also pass lead to their
babies when breastfeeding. Formula prepared using water contaminated with lead from leaded pipes and plumbing parts can
also result in a baby being exposed to lead.

Some adults work in industries or have hobbies that expose them to lead. These adults may bring lead home with them and
expose their families to lead without knowing. For example, a parent who works in battery manufacturing or renovation of
older homes could bring home lead dust on their clothes, shoes, skin, hair, and hands. This dust can be tracked onto carpets,

floors, furniture, and other surfaces that a child may touch. Adults who are exposed to lead in their workplace or from
hobbies should take steps to keep them and their families safe from lead.

Children
Pregnant Women

Refugees

International Adoption
Workers

Last Reviewed: October 29, 2021

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/populations.htm 2/2



Page 300: 5/11/24, 4:22 PM Precipitation & Flooding | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

a) Centers for Disease
, D Control and Prevention

National Environmental Public Health Tracking

Precipitation & Flooding

We Track That

We partner with the Climate and Health Program to host data from several sources to track extreme precipitation and
flooding in the United States. These data can help communities prepare for and respond to weather-related events.

Types of Data

The Tracking Network provides data about extreme precipitation and the vulnerabilities that increase risk for health effects
related to those extreme weather events.

Historical Precipitation
This indicator provides the number of extreme precipitation days and the monthly estimates of precipitation by county
and census tract for every state except Alaska and Hawaii.

Precipitation & Flooding Projections

This indicator shows modeled precipitation data on projected extreme precipitation days and projected maximum
precipitation during an extreme event. The projected data result from comparing projected values for different time
periods (early 215t century, mid-21%t century, and late 21%' century) to historical data from 1976-2005. Data are available
nationwide at the county level.

Vulnerability & Preparedness: Precipitation & Flooding
This indicator provides county-level estimates on the total area and percentage of total areas within a flood hazard zone,

as well as the number of residents and housing units per county in a 100-year flood zone. The data use flood hazard risk
areas defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

Data Highlight

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Flooding.htm

1/4



Page 301: 5/11/24, 4:22 PM Precipitation & Flooding | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Add layers to any map.
Click on the gear icon to select layers: surface smoke, current radar, transportation noise, active Atlantic cyclones. Try it!

Data in Action

Tracking precipitation and flooding in a standard way over time can help us
e determine trends over time and place,
e evaluate extreme weather events at the national level, while allowing for comparisons across states,
e better understand the possible health effects and risks to specific groups of people,

e identify conditions that make people vulnerable during extreme weather events, and

e design interventions and communication efforts for at-risk populations.

Learn More

e Climate and Health Program

e Precipitation Extremes: Heavy Rainfall, Flooding, and Droughts

Explore Precipitation & Flooding Data

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Flooding.htm

2/4



Page 302: 5/11/24, 4:22 PM Precipitation & Flooding | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Data Explorer

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

Carter] fe 6 eee

Aa Persad ie ee eee ee ee ed

ders Pe sein =| Por ol eee eee ee. i ed ed

dade Persie ayy Bet | Pg ol ach. ee eer ee eo aad ss ec be ee De
fae Pie oe ee eed el ee ey ed en tec Rdg Bk condo aod Lk 7 sar |

date: Par ere | Pac eas ee A ee eB eed > ena 0 8) od erik

ee Pee Sey Far

ee Pee es Pgs oe eee ee ie ew ee ee te]
AASB Peele ces U5 pe ee ee ee eS oy ee ee
dere Payer ee eee || Ped cd ac 0 ee ee ed er Ll ad

date Pe ere are eis Poel ies. Ee

ae a!
et ee eo en ee ee
Lika
do eee re Parner @ ccs ae eed er ee) i eee

Cicer
View data in simple charts

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Flooding.htm



Page 303: 5/11/24, 4:22 PM

API

Precipitation & Flooding | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

REQUEST

Pl

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Flooding.htm

44



Page 304: 5/11/24, 2:14 PM Precipitation Extremes: Heavy Rainfall, Flooding, and Droughts | CDC

rr DC Centers for Disease
be Control and Prevention

Precipitation Extremes: Heavy Rainfall, Flooding, and
Droughts

The frequency of heavy precipitation events has already increased for the nation as a whole, and is projected to increase in all
U.S. regions. Increases in both extreme precipitation and total precipitation have contributed to increases in severe flooding
events in certain regions. Floods are the second deadliest of all weather-related hazards in the United States, accounting for
approximately 98 deaths per year, most due to drowning. Flash floods and flooding associated with tropical storms result in
the highest number of deaths.

In addition to the immediate health hazards associated with extreme precipitation events when flooding occurs, other
hazards can often appear once a storm has passed. Elevated waterborne disease outbreaks have been reported in the weeks
following heavy rainfall, although other variables may affect these associations. Water intrusion into buildings can result in
mold contamination that manifests later, leading to indoor air quality problems. Buildings damaged during hurricanes are
especially susceptible to water intrusion. Populations living in damp indoor environments experience increased prevalence of
asthma and other upper respiratory tract symptoms, such as coughing and wheezing, as well as lower respiratory tract
infections such as pneumonia, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and RSV pneumonia.

At the opposite end of precipitation extremes, drought also poses risks to public health and safety. Drought conditions may
increase the environmental exposure to a broad set of health hazards including wildfires, dust storms, extreme heat events,
flash flooding, degraded water quality, and reduced water quantity. Dust storms associated with drought conditions
contribute to degraded air quality due to particulates and have been associated with increased incidence of
coccidioidomycosis (valley fever), a fungal pathogen, in Arizona and California.

Watch a short video about how climate change can increase storms and flooding, and what communities can do to prepare.

Read more about drought.

CDC Heavy Precipitation and Flooding Resources:

e Floods - prepare for a flood, stay safe during a flood, and protect your health when you return home after a flood
e Mold - mold and health, cleanup efforts, and prevention of mold growth
e Asthma - guidance on asthma care before, during, and after a hurricane or flood

e Water, Sanitation, & Hygiene (WASH)-related Emergencies & Outbreaks - guidance on multiple hazards related to floods
and standing water

e NIOSH Storm, Flood, and Hurricane Response - recommendations for employers and workers engaged in emergency
response and recovery activities

e Flood Vulnerability and Projection Data - Tracking Portal - interactive maps, tables, and charts

e Extreme Rainfall and Drought Can Impact our Health BB [PDF - 97.7 KB]

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/precipitation_extremes.htm



Page 305: 5/11/24, 2:14 PM Precipitation Extremes: Heavy Rainfall, Flooding, and Droughts | CDC

e Warmer Water and Flooding Increase the Risk of Illness or Injury BB [PDF - 183 KB]
Page last reviewed: December 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/precipitation_extremes.htm 2/2



Page 306: 5/11/24, 4:21 PM Preparedness & Response | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

DC Centers for Disease
», Control and Prevention

Preparedness & Response

We Track That

Knowledge of a community's local infrastructure, vulnerabilities, and resources enables public health professionals to quickly
establish priorities and take proper actions during emergency or disaster response. The Tracking Network datasets listed
below can be used to

e identify community-specific threats and hazards, at-risk populations, and community vulnerabilities.
e make informed decisions about resources needed for public health response or public safety.
e determine potential public health actions that could lessen or prevent illness, injury, and death.

e evaluate possible scenarios based on time, place, and conditions.

Types of Data

The Tracking Network presents data in customizable maps, charts, and tables. Map layers can provide important contextual
information including overlays of real-time data (weather radar, surface smoke, and active Atlantic cyclones) and points of
interest such as day care centers and public schools, fire stations, hospitals, mobile home parks, National Shelter System
Facilities, nursing homes, power plants, and urgent care facilities.

It is important to note that the following data are based on total populations, rather than individual members of a particular
population.

Demographics “N

This indicator includes population estimates (number and percent) of people by race, ethnicity, age, gender, single-parent
households, speaking English less than “very well”, and aged 65 years and older and living alone. Data are presented at
census tract, county, and/or state level for all states.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Preparedness.htm#print

115



Page 307: 5/11/24, 4:21 PM Preparedness & Response | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Health Status Ky

This indicator includes data on several health conditions that could make a person more vulnerable in emergency or
disaster situations. Examples include certain disabilities, chronic health issues (e.g., arthritis, diabetes, high blood
pressure), mental health issues, and overall physical health. These data are available at the census tract level for all 50
states. Sources include the American Community Survey [4, National Diabetes Surveillance System, and CDC's Population
Level Analysis and Community Estimates (PLACES) Project.

Heat Vulnerability & Preparedness Vv

This indicator includes measures that may make people at greater risk for heat-related health effects. These measures
are diabetes, heart disease, poverty, race, advanced age, social isolation, disabilities, population density, forest canopy,
developed land use, and cultivated crop land use.

Households or

This indicator provides information about the housing units within a community. It includes the total number of housing
units, as well as the number and percent of housing units with 10 or more units, more people than rooms, and no vehicle
available. In addition, you can find the number and percent of vacant housing units, renter-occupied housing, and mobile
homes. Also included are data on the number and percent of the population living in group quarters. Census tract-,
county-, and state-level data are available.

Internet Access Vv

This indicator provides information about internet access. It includes number and percent of people with access to
computer with internet (but no cell phone). It also includes the number and percent of households with smartphones,
households with a smartphone but no other device, and households with no internet access. In addition, you can find the
number and percent of people who have a computer without an internet subscription, with different age, income, and
education options. Census tract-, county-, and state-level data are available.

Land Cover ZF

This indicator provides census tract-, county-, and state-level data on the percent of land covered by water, percent of
land covered by forest, and percent of developed imperviousness.

Land Use Vv

This indicator provides census tract-, county-, and state-level data on the percent of land used for agriculture and percent
of developed land use. It also provides rural-urban county classifications.

Medical Infrastructure Vv

This indicator provides county-level data on the numbers of hospitals, numbers of hospital beds, percentage of hospitals
located within a flood hazard area, and percentage of hospital beds located within a flood hazard area. These data can be
used to identify community vulnerabilities, plan resource needs, and inform disaster preparedness efforts.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Preparedness.htm#print



Page 308: 5/11/24, 4:21 PM Preparedness & Response | Tracking | NCEH | CDC
Social Vulnerability Index Vv

This indicator shows relative vulnerability of every U.S. census tract on 14 social factors including poverty, lack of vehicle
access, and crowded housing. The factors are grouped into four related themes. Each census tract receives a ranking for
each variable, each theme, and an overall ranking. These data can be used by public health officials and local planners to
better prepare communities to respond to emergency events like severe weather, floods, disease outbreaks, or chemical
exposure. Depending on the year, data are available at the census tract and county level for all states.

Socioeconomic Status Vv

This indicator includes data on poverty, household income, employment status, and high school (or equivalent)
graduation status. Data are presented at census tract, county, and/or state level for all states.

Vulnerability & Preparedness: Precipitation & Flooding Ww

This indicator provides county-level estimates on the total area and percentage of total areas within a flood hazard zone,
as well as the number of residents and housing units per county in a 100-year flood zone. The data use flood hazard risk
areas defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

Wildfires or

This indicator displays locations of predicted surface smoke concentrations from wildfires that are layered on top of
county- and census tract-level measures of access to care and social vulnerability, health status, annual air quality levels,
or population characteristics.

Tools

e Heat and Health Tracker: Dashboard providing local, timely data and info to help communities to prepare for and
respond to extreme heat events.

e CRC Simpler: Community Reception Center Simulation Program for Leveraging and Evaluating Resources - a planning
tool for radiation emergencies

Resources

e Disaster Epidemiology and Response

e Emergency Preparedness and Response

e Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response

e Planning for an Emergency: Strategies for Identifying and Engaging At-Risk Groups B&

e Public Health Emergency Response Guide for State, Local, and Tribal Public Health Directors, version 2.0

Data Explorer

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Preparedness.htm#print 3/5



Page 309: 5/11/24, 4:21 PM Preparedness & Response | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

x

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

Carter] fe 6 eee
Aa Persad ie ee eee ee ee ed
denne Payee roe cee || Gece ol ie ee ee. i ed oe
dade Persie ayy Bet | Pg ol ach. ee eer ee eo aad ss ec be ee De
fale ee oe oe ey Gadel ie eee ol mk == Wee a 1, ee = oe he Fee pee pe * mars |y
eae: Era ce Pace Oe ee eo A ee he

ee eee ee A a a a. Es ed ee a al =

ee Pee es Pgs oe eee ee ie ew ee ee te]
AASB Peele ces U5 pe ee ee ee eS oy ee ee
dere Payer ee eee || Ped cd ac 0 ee ee ed er Ll ad
die Peres eee ces | Ppp cies. a ee ee We ee ice 9 cre ed a GL! acl

et ee ee eg ee ee ri i a
Lika

ee eee ee Pod 2 ee ee ee) ee ee) ee eee

View data in simple charts

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Preparedness.htm#print



Page 310: 5/11/24, 4:21 PM

API

Preparedness & Response | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Preparedness.htm#print

5/5



Page 311: 5/11/24, 4:36 PM Racial Disparities and Legionnaires’ Disease | Safe Water | EHS | CDC.

Racial Disparities and Legionnaires’ Disease

Learn about drivers of health disparities and explore what they mean for future research and practice.

LD is more common among Black people compared with other racial groups
New cases per 100,000 people

5 Black people

White,

non-Hispanic people

American Indian/
Alaska Native people

Data from CDC's National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System as published in the scientific article [4 this summary is
based on.

Legionnaires’ disease (LD) is increasing in the United States, and Black people and people of lower income have higher
rates of it. We reviewed articles on health disparities and LD and other respiratory-related diseases. We then grouped the
findings by five social determinants of health. Social determinants of health are the conditions in which people are born,
grow, live, work, worship, and age that can affect their health and quality of life. Our goal was to look at causes of these
health disparities so future research and interventions can help prevent new cases of LD.

Social determinants of health can help us understand drivers of health disparities.

New cases of LD are at least 60% higher among Black people than among White, non-Hispanic people. For example, in
2018, new cases were more than twice as high among Black people than among White, non-Hispanic people (4.87 cases
compared with 2.37 cases per 100,000 people).

We explored social determinants of health underlying these health disparities to help guide future research and
interventions. We used the five social determinants of health outlined in Hea/thy People 2030, a national plan for

addressing public health challenges. Those included 1) economic stability, 2) education, 3) health and health care, 4)
neighborhood and built environment, and 5) social and community context:

Economic stability

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/legionella/racial-disparities-LD.html



Page 312: 5/11/24, 4:36 PM Racial Disparities and Legionnaires’ Disease | Safe Water | EHS | CDC.

re: e People living in poverty had the highest rate of new LD cases.

e Job type also affects LD risk. People working in hazardous or service industries — including

transportation, repair, protective services, cleaning, and construction — were at increased risk.

Education

s e People with less education were more likely to have LD and more likely to have pneumonia.
es

Health and health care

e New cases of LD were elevated among people with certain conditions, including diabetes and
pneumonia.

Neighborhood and built environment

e¢ New cases of LD were elevated among people who lived in areas with a higher percentage of vacant
homes, rented homes, and homes built before 1950.

e New cases were also elevated among people who lived near construction sites and cooling towers.

Social and community context

e & e e No studies measured social and community context factors such as stress, discrimination, or social

‘en*® interactions that might affect rates of LD.

e Future researchers can help fill gaps in information relating to this social determinant of health.

Public health action can help address the
increased burden of LD among Black people
and people of lower incomes.

Researchers can help fill knowledge gaps related to
built environment factors such as housing, drinking
water systems, and pollutant exposures. Such
research can show how repeated exposure to
environmental risks adds to LD health disparities.
Certain communities are more likely to have vacant
buildings with poorly maintained water systems, older
housing with deteriorating plumbing, and declining
drinking water infrastructure—conditions that create the
environment for Legionella growth in pipes. Research in
this area can help identify interventions to address these
conditions.

Environmental health programs and researchers can
correlate data on social determinants of health with
mapped locations from LD surveillance data (see text
box). Our findings underscore the importance of
examining data in the context of social determinants of
health related to LD.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/legionella/racial-disparities-LD.html

Some data sources that link environmental and
socioeconomic variables

¢ County Health Rankings and Roadmaps [4 (Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation)

e Environmental Public Health Tracking Network (CDC)
e Social Vulnerability Index (CDC/ATSDR)

2/3



Page 313: 5/11/24, 4:36 PM Racial Disparities and Legionnaires’ Disease | Safe Water | EHS | CDC.

Environmental health programs and researchers can
offer assistance to healthcare organizations and
stakeholders working to address poor housing
quality, air pollution, and conditions that
disproportionately affect people with lower incomes
and people from racial and ethnic minority groups.

Want More Information?

e Read the scientific article on which this plain
language summary is based: Racial disparities in
incidence of Legionnaires’ disease and social
determinants of health: A narrative review. 4

e Explore CDC's Toolkit on Developing a Water
Management Program to Reduce Legionella Growth
and Spread in Buildings.

e Discover CDC's new Toolkit for
Controlling Legionella in Common Sources of
Exposure.

e Take Preventing Legionnaires’ Disease: A Training
on Legionella Water Management
Programs (PreventLD Training).

e Find more LD Resources.

e Learn more about Racism and Health.

Page last reviewed: March 18, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/legionella/racial-disparities-LD.html



Page 314: 5/11/24, 4:22 PM Radon Testing | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

CD Centers for Disease _
» Control and Prevention

Home

Radon Testing

We Track That

The Tracking Network has radon testing data at the state and county level for most of the continental United States. The data
on the Tracking Network come from some Tracking Program-funded states and several national radon testing laboratories.

Types of Data

Radon Test Data from Labs

This indicator provides radon testing data at the state and county level for most of the continental United States. National
radon testing laboratories provide these data to the Tracking Network. Data available include number of buildings tested;
number and percent of pre-mitigation* tests by radon level; median pre-mitigation* radon levels in tested buildings; and

maximum pre-mitigation* radon levels in tested buildings.

Radon Test Data from States
This indicator provides radon testing data at the state and county level for some Tracking Program-funded states.
Individual states provide these data to the Tracking Network. Available data include number of buildings tested; number

and percent of pre-mitigation* tests by radon level; number and percent of post-mitigation* tests by radon level; median
pre-mitigation* test levels of radon; and maximum pre-mitigation* levels of radon.

* All pre-mitigation data include those test results not designated as pre- or post-mitigation.

Data Highlight

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/RadonTesting.htm

115



Page 315: Radon Testing | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

5/11/24, 4:22 PM

Gila benny

From 2008 - 2017, the Northeast and northern Midwest areas of the United States had the most buildings tested for

radon. Explore more radon test data.

Data in Action

Analyzing, collecting, and disseminating radon testing information is the first step to developing policies and educational
resources that can help prevent the harmful health effects related to elevated radon exposures. For example, tracking radon
data in a standard way over time can help us identify areas with low testing that might have high levels of radon. These data
can inform planning and implementation of public health actions for areas with the greatest need

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/RadonTesting.htm

2/5



Page 316: 5/11/24, 4:22 PM Radon Testing | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Read these success stories to learn about the radon related work happening in our funded Tracking Programs.

Colorado | Kansas | New Hampshire | New Jersey | Oregon | Washington

Learn More

CDC/ATSDR

e Protect Yourself and Your Family from Radon
e Radon in the Home
e Toxic Substances Portal: Radon

e Radon Monitoring and Data Collection in the United States
Other Sources

e Environmental Protection Agency 4
¢ Department of Housing and Urban Development 4

e National Environmental Health Association 4
Tracking Resources

e Radon Infographic B&
e CDC's Tracking Program: Mapping Radon Exposure in Washington (video)
e Faces of Tracking: Meghan’s Story

e Radon Toolkit for Public Health Professionals

Explore Radon Testing Data

Data Explorer

a a

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/RadonTesting.htm

3/5



Page 317: 5/11/24, 4:22 PM

Quick Reports

Corton fgg 6 da ree
rane

dere Payee eg ee
aera CEs Bo Sc,
dees Peeve om oe ey Bde

dag aye reg ee

i
Chicey

Radon Testing | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

an Te

eR Bien et ieee Donal

Parner of eee ee ere. rl ad od!

Pacoeaiol acieft. ee ieee ee anon i er ere be ed Bad i
Pom pee 0 omg Rei pes Baga pm ames fog cnt remanence ee ee Pee eae pg ee oy
Peirce eck ea eS Ail We Pe oa! ed cen +

Pree cadence cc eer es eed =, em EL eed ora:

fe TE We eo en Be Ll

Ps aa re) iD a sy AO, ati (UAT, ot ll

oe Pee Bebe epee Pee We EP ke Pehl |
i

Pee aches. i ee ee oe ee ue che creel oe. en cen mn 0 arc
ea

Duar ll i i ee Ln ne ea sc Tr a

Per of onde a ee er ee ee

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

ATA

Access machine-readable data

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/RadonTesting.htm

4/5



Page 318: 5/11/24, 4:22 PM Radon Testing | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Page last reviewed: June 3, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/RadonTesting.htm 5/5



Page 319: 5/11/24, 2:03 PM Recovered Chemical Weapons and Other Chemical Agent Materials | NCEH | CDC
Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Chemical Weapons Elimination Home

Recovered Chemical Weapons and Other Chemical
Agent Materials

DoD teams respond to discoveries of chemical weapons
if relat aminated equipment.

When these materials are found, COC is notified and:

» Evaluates the plans for transportation 2
and disposal

» Makes recommendations on the plans <
for safe disposal and transportation of the
recovered weapons and materia’s

Dod teams are often able to use mobile
equipment to dispose of materials near the
discovery locations to minamize the Fisk to
public health.

www.cde gov

Historically, chemical agents and munitions were tested and disposed of on military installations. Like with other wastes,
burial was the accepted disposal method up until the 1970s. This practice has left buried munitions at some military and
former military installations. From 1967 to 1970, thousands of tons of chemical warfare agents and munitions were loaded
onto old ships and intentionally sunk at sea. This program was called Operation Cut Holes and Sink ‘EM (CHASE).

In 1997, the United States ratified the Chemical Weapons Convention, mandating destruction of stockpiled chemical weapons,
former chemical agent production facilities, recovered chemical weapons, and other chemical agent material. Much of it has
been destroyed, but some remains, both underground and at sea.

Discarded chemical weapons have been found in unlikely places:

oe 47

e In Delaware, an artillery shell was found in a driveway paved with crushed clamshells.

e In New York, commercial fishermen found chemical munitions while dredging for clams off the coast of Long Island. Two
fishermen were treated at a local hospital. Fortunately, their nurse was trained to recognize chemical agent symptoms.

e Inthe District of Columbia, chemical agents were found buried on the property of private residences during excavation.

If you see a suspicious object, call your local police department. Do not try to move it yourself.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/recovered-chemical-weapons-and-other-chemical-agent-materials.html



Page 320: 5/11/24, 2:03 PM Recovered Chemical Weapons and Other Chemical Agent Materials | NCEH | CDC

Recovery of Sea-Disposed
Chemical Warfare Material

When possible chemical weapons or other material are found on land, the Recovered Chemical Materiel Directorate 4
responds to assess for chemical agent and plans for the destruction and disposal of the item.

If the item is chemical agent material, CDC is notified and reviews the transportation and disposal plans. These reviews for
public health and safety typically include onsite inspections and review of air monitoring capabilities.

Additional Resources

¢ What is Recovered Chemical Warfare Materiel (army.mil) —§ [PDF - 980 KB] 4

e Recovered Chemical Materiel Directorate Fact Sheets (army.mil) 4
Last Reviewed: October 13, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/recovered-chemical-weapons-and-other-chemical-agent-materials.html

2/2



Page 321: 5/11/24, 1:59 PM Recovery of Sea-Disposed Chemical Warfare Material | NCEH | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Z4 Centers for Disease
§ Control and Prevention

Chemical Weapons Elimination

Chemical Weapons Elimination Home

Recovery of Sea-Disposed Chemical Warfare Material

Learn what to do when you encounter chemical munitions on your vessel

Recovery of Sea-Disposed
Chemical Warfare Material

Learn what to do when you encounter chemical munitions on your vessel

National Center
for Environmental Health
Agency for Toxic Substances

and Disease Registry

You dredged up a munition along with your catch. These munitions often contain warfare chemicals, and they can
be encountered anywhere at sea, not just charted hazardous areas. The U.S. Army Technical Center for Explosives Safety
provides guidance on how to RECOGNIZE, RETREAT from, and REPORT munitions at sea in their Munitions At Sea pamphlet.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/sea-disposed-chemical-munitions.htm

115



Page 322: 5/11/24, 1:59 PM Recovery of Sea-Disposed Chemical Warfare Material | NCEH | CDC

Commercial fishing, clamming, and dredging operations should be prepared to respond when munitions are brought up
from the ocean. Vessels should prepare a munitions response kit of necessary supplies in advance and provide crew with
appropriate training on how to protect themselves. Crew who perform jobs where catch or other items are brought up from
the ocean should be trained on how to recognize munitions, properly handle munition, safely put on and remove personal
protective equipment (PPE), decontaminate potentially contaminated surfaces, and recognize signs and symptoms of
exposure.

Before the 1970s, disposal of excess, obsolete, or unserviceable munitions at sea was common. Sea-disposal operations
included the disposal of conventional munitions of every type and chemical munitions with various chemical agent fills.
Commercial fishing, clamming, and dredging operations can stir up these munitions and they can be encountered anywhere
at sea, not just charted hazardous areas. There is now increasing concern about environmental and human health effects
associated with the disposal of these agents both on land and in the ocean.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, along with other partners, developed tools for commercial fishermen
encountering chemical munitions that will help identify personal protective equipment that be used to help prevent exposure,
how to safely handle the munition, how to report the incident, and includes a resource card that can be taken with them to
seek medical attention and is useful in the identification of signs and symptoms of exposure.

The tools were provided to industry and stakeholders, including NOAA, USCG, USFDA, and various state public and
environmental health agencies that may become involved in the incidents.

Following the Munitions At Sea pamphlet, you must RECOGNIZE, RETREAT
from, and REPORT actual or suspected munitions. It is best not to bring
actual or suspected munitions onboard. If munition is brought onboard and
if you must handle it, you should follow these recommendations to protect
yourself:

Example of Burns and Blisters from Mustard Exposure

iti?

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/sea-disposed-chemical-munitions.htm



Page 323: 5/11/24, 1:59 PM Recovery of Sea-Disposed Chemical Warfare Material | NCEH | CDC

1. Isolate: You should keep unneeded crew members upwind and as far away as possible. The captain should steer the
vessel into the wind to help minimize vapor exposure.

2. Decide on action: You should quickly decide if you will need to handle the munition. The longer the munition is
exposed to ambient temperatures the more likely it is to leak. Beware of any leaking substances—vapors are toxic and
liquids can cause burns. If crew members are not trained to properly handle munitions and how to safely wear PPE, or if
you do not have the appropriate equipment, stop and request assistance from the U.S. Coast Guard on channel 16
(156.800 MHZ) or by calling (800) 424-8802.

3. Protect responding crew members: Crew members who are properly trained and will approach and handle the
munition should wear appropriate PPE to protect their skin from leaking liquids. PPE should be put on (donned) in the
following order:

e a. Inner pair of gloves
e b. Suit

e c. Apron

e d. Face shield

e e. Outer pair of gloves

4. Take action: Crew members trained to handle munitions should jettison or secure the munition as necessary.

5. Decontaminate: Decontaminate equipment and individuals that are potentially contaminated with liquid that leaked
from the munition by physically removing the warfare chemical with soap and water. Make sure the wash solution and
rinse water do not enter the vessel or come into contact with you or your coworkers. The wash solution and rinse water
should be handled as hazardous waste and disposed of in accordance with applicable standards. Follow your company's
policy regarding how to determine when equipment is properly decontaminated.

e Equipment: Wash and rinse contaminated surfaces with soap and water (using cold or warm water).

e People: lf you or a coworker are exposed to liquid from the munition, remove all clothing and place into sealed plastic
bags. Thoroughly wash and rinse the contaminated skin using a soap and water solution. You should wash the
individual starting at their head and working your way down to their toes. Rinse the individual's eyes with clean water
for at least 20 minutes. Be careful not to scratch or break the skin and cover all open wounds. Cover the individual to
prevent shock and loss of body heat. Exposed individuals should seek immediate medical attention.

\

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/sea-disposed-chemical-munitions.htm



Page 324: 5/11/24, 1:59 PM Recovery of Sea-Disposed Chemical Warfare Material | NCEH | CDC

6. Remove PPE: After handling the munition and decontaminating surfaces, remove PPE and place into sealed plastic
bags. When removing PPE, the outer surface should be treated as potentially contaminated and care should be taken to
not touch the outside surface, roll PPE downward, and avoid pulling PPE off over the head. Remove (doff) the PPE in the
following order:

e a. Outer pair of gloves
e b. Apron

e c. Face shield

e d. Suit

e e. Inner pair of gloves

PPE should be disposed of in accordance with applicable standards.

A

7. Alert: Notify the U.S. Coast Guard on channel 16 (156.800 MHZ) or by calling (800) 424-8802.

8. Look: Look for symptoms. Symptoms can happen right away or up to 48 hours after exposure. Symptoms include
sudden weakness, burning eyes, skin blisters, trouble breathing, redness, and burning skin. If you suspect you were
exposed, go to the emergency room.

9. Protect the public: Follow your company's policy regarding the catch. Fishing vessels that have come into contact with
chemical agents must not bring their catch ashore until it has been checked and released by the appropriate state's
department of environmental health. Sea life contaminated by chemicals is unsuitable for human or animal consumption.

The following items are recommended to have onboard in your munitions response kit:

* Recovery of Sea-Disposed Chemical Warfare Material pamphlet —§ [PDF - 2 MB]

* Emergency Response Card: Information for First Responders BB [PDF - 227 KB]

* Signs and Symptoms of Exposure to Sulphur Mustard —§ [PDF - 77 KB]

* Chemical protective suit that provide protection against chemical warfare agents (such as a suit made out of Tychem®
F, Tychem® BR/LV, Tychem® Responder®, Tychem® TK, Trellchem® HPS, Trellchem® VPS with taped seams)

* Chemical-resistant apron

* Inner gloves (such as nitrile rubber)

* Chemical-resistant outer gloves that provide protection against chemical warfare agents (such as butyl rubber, Viton®
HPS/Butyl rubber, Silver Shield/4H® HPS)

* Face shield

* Disposable plastic waste bags 10 mills thick (or double trash bags 6 mills thick)

* Soap

* Brush for decontamination

* Water proof container to store the kit in

If jettisoning the munition, using a two person team to place munition in a plastic tote and lift to gunwale. You should
toss both the tote and munition overboard.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/sea-disposed-chemical-munitions.htm



Page 325: 5/11/24, 1:59 PM Recovery of Sea-Disposed Chemical Warfare Material | NCEH | CDC

Resources

e Brochure: Recovery for Sea-Disposed Chemical Warfare Material B& [PDF - 2 MB]
e Poster: Steps for Safe Munitions Handling BM [PDF - 227 KB]

e Postcard: Signs & Symptoms of Exposure to Sulfur Mustard B& [PDF - 77 KB]

Last Reviewed: March 1, 2019

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/sea-disposed-chemical-munitions.htm

5/5



Page 326: 5/11/24, 4:36 PM Reopening Buildings After Prolonged Shutdown or Reduced Operation

CDC Centers for Disease —
ede, Control and Prevention

Reopening Buildings After Prolonged Shutdown or
Reduced Operation

Ensure the safety of your occupants and building water system and devices: Check for hazards including
Legionella, mold, and lead and copper.

A temporary shutdown or reduced operation of a building (for example, a school or a childcare facility) and reductions in
normal water use can create hazards for returning occupants. Check for hazards before reopening after a prolonged
period of building inactivity. Hazards include Legionella (the cause of Legionnaires’ disease), mold, and lead and copper
contamination [9 [PDF - 995 KB] [% from corroded plumbing.

For Legionella, a “prolonged period” may be weeks or months depending on plumbing-specific factors, disinfectant
residuals, water heater temperature set points, water usage patterns, and preexisting Legionella colonization.'

For mold, a “prolonged period” may be days, weeks, or months depending upon building-specific factors, season, and
weather variables.”

For lead and copper, a “prolonged period” may be hours, days, weeks, or months depending on plumbing and water-
specific factors, the amount of time the water remains stagnant inside the pipes, whether there are protective scales or
coatings present inside pipes that prevent metals from leaching into water, and the materials used to build the plumbing
system.?

Note that additional hazards not discussed on this page may exist for returning occupants. These can include other
hazards, such as nontuberculous mycobacteria, disinfection by-products, and sewer gases that enter buildings through
dry sanitary sewer drain traps.

Legionella and Legionnaires’ disease

Stagnant or standing water in a plumbing system can increase the risk for growth and spread of Legionella and other
biofilm-associated bacteria. When water is stagnant, hot water temperatures can decrease to the Legionella growth range
(77°-113°F, 25°-42°C). Stagnant water can also lead to low or undetectable levels of disinfectant, such as chlorine. Ensure
that your water system is safe to use after a prolonged shutdown to minimize the risk of Legionnaires’ disease and other
diseases associated with water.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/legionella/building-water-system.html



Page 327: 5/11/24, 4:36 PM Reopening Buildings After Prolonged Shutdown or Reduced Operation

People at increased risk of developing Legionnaires’ disease, such as those with weakened immune systems, should
consult with a medical provider regarding participation in flushing, cooling tower cleaning, or other activities that may
generate aerosols. Wearing a half-face air-purifying respirator equipped with an N95 filter, or an N95 filtering facepiece,
may be appropriate in enclosed spaces where aerosol generation is likely. Respirators must be used in accordance with a
comprehensive respiratory protection program, which includes fit testing, training, and medical clearance ahead of their
use (See OSHA standard 29 CFR 1910.134 [4% and OSHA Legionellosis website [4 ). For more information about N95
respirators, visit the NIOSH National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory (NPPTL) website.

8 steps to minimize Legionella risk before your business or building
reopens

1. Develop a comprehensive water management program (WMP) for your water system and all devices that use water.
Guidance to help with these processes are the following:

a. Water Management Program Toolkit:

This toolkit is designed to help people understand which buildings and devices need a Legionella water
management program to reduce the risk of Legionnaires’ disease, what makes a good program, and how to
develop it.

b. Toolkit for Controlling Legionella in Common Sources of Exposure:

This toolkit provides public health and building owners and operators with concise, actionable information on
controlling Legionella in commonly implicated sources of Legionnaires’ disease outbreaks.

c. Preventing Legionnaires’ Disease: A Training on Legionella Water Management Programs (PreventLD Training):
Take this training from CDC and partners on creating a water management program to reduce risk of
Legionnaires’ disease. PreventLD Training aligns with industry standards on managing risk of Legionella bacteria.

d. Hotel Guidance:

Considerations for Hotel Owners and Managers: How to Prevent Legionnaires’ Disease

e. Operating Public Hot Tubs/Spas

Dh

Reduce Risk from Water: Plumbing to Patients:

Water management programs in healthcare facilities are an important way to help protect vulnerable patient
populations as well as staff and visitors.

g. Preventing Occupational Exposure to Legionella

2. Ensure your water heater is properly maintained and the temperature is correctly set.
a. Determine if your manufacturer recommends draining the water heater after a prolonged period of disuse.
Ensure that all maintenance activities are carried out according to the manufacturer's instructions or by

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/legionella/building-water-system.html

2/6



Page 328: 5/11/24, 4:36 PM Reopening Buildings After Prolonged Shutdown or Reduced Operation

professionals.
b. Make sure that your water heater is set to at least 140°F.

c. Higher temperatures can further reduce the risk of Legionella growth, but ensure that you take measures to
prevent scalding.

3. Flush your water system
a. Flush hot and cold water through all points of use (e.g., showers, sink faucets)
i. Flushing may need to occur in segments (e.g., floors, individual rooms) due to facility size and water
pressure. The purpose of building flushing is to replace all water inside building piping with fresh water.

b. Flush until the hot water reaches its maximum temperature. Where possible, hot water at the tap should reach at
or above 120°F. Anti-scalding controls and devices may limit the maximum temperature at the point of use.

c. Care should be taken to minimize splashing and aerosol generation during flushing.

d. Other water-using devices, such as ice machines, may require additional cleaning steps in addition to flushing,
such as discarding old ice. Follow water-using device manufacturers’ instructions.

4. Clean all decorative water features, such as fountains
a. Be sure to follow any recommended manufacturer guidelines for cleaning.

b. Ensure that decorative water features are free of visible slime or biofilm.
c. After the water feature has been re-filled, measure disinfectant levels to ensure that the water is safe for use.

5. Ensure hot tubs/spas are safe for use
a. Check for existing guidelines from your local or state regulatory agency before use.

b. Ensure that hot tubs/spas are free of visible slime or biofilm before filling with water.

c. Perform a hot tub/spa disinfection procedure before use.
i. CDC Hot Tub Disinfection Guidance [—& [PDF - 135 KB] (follow Steps 4-9 and 12-13).

ii. Facilities may decide to test the hot tub/spa for Legionella before returning to service if previous device
maintenance logs, bacterial testing results, or associated cases of Legionnaires’ disease indicate an elevated
level of risk to occupants. All Legionella testing decisions should be made in consultation with facility water
management program staff along with relevant public health authorities.

6. Ensure cooling towers are clean and well-maintained
a. Ensure that cooling towers are maintained (including start-up and shut-down procedures) per manufacturer's
guidelines and industry best practices.
i. Guidance on start-up and shut-down procedures from the Cooling Technology Institute (CT 159) 4

b. Ensure that the tower and basin are free of visible slime, debris, and biofilm before use.
i. If the tower appears well-maintained, perform an online disinfection procedure.
= Guidance on disinfection procedures from the Cooling Technology Institute BR [PDF - 128 KB] 4

7. Ensure safety equipment including fire sprinkler systems, eye wash stations, and safety showers are clean and well-
maintained
a. Regularly flush, clean, and disinfect these systems according to manufacturers’ specifications.

8. Maintain your water system
a. Consider contacting your local water utility to learn about any recent disruptions in the water supply. This could
include working with the local water utility to ensure that standard checkpoints near the building or at the meter
to the building have recently been checked or request that disinfectant residual entering the building meets
expected standards.

b. After your water system has returned to normal, ensure that the risk of Legionella growth is minimized by
regularly checking water quality parameters such as temperature, pH, and disinfectant levels.

c. Follow your water management program, document activities, and promptly intervene when unplanned program
deviations arise.

Mold

Mold will grow on building materials where there is moisture, produced from leaks or condensation from roofs, windows,
or pipes, or from a flood. Mold can grow on a variety of surfaces, such as ceiling tiles, wallpaper, insulation, drywall,
carpet, and fabric. People with asthma and other respiratory conditions and those with mold allergy or weakened

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/legionella/building-water-system.html

3/6



Page 329: 5/11/24, 4:36 PM Reopening Buildings After Prolonged Shutdown or Reduced Operation

immune systems should avoid buildings suspected or confirmed to have mold contamination. Ensure that your building
does not have mold after a prolonged shutdown to maintain a safe working environment for returning occupants.

5 steps to minimize mold risk during and after a prolonged shutdown

1. Maintain indoor humidity as low as possible, not exceeding 50%, as measured with a humidity meter. Building
managers may consider continuous monitoring of indoor humidity using a digital hygrometer, ideally more than once
daily, to minimize the need to access the building.

2. After a prolonged shutdown and before occupants return, buildings should be assessed for mold and excess moisture.

a. Building inspections by trained industrial hygienists can recognize dampness or mold by sight or odor, without
the need for sampling and laboratory analysis. NIOSH offers tools and instructions to assess dampness and mold
in schools and general buildings. These tools can be used by building maintenance staff as well as industrial
hygienists.

b. If dampness or mold is detected, address the source of water entry first. Clean-up and remediation should then
be conducted before the building is reoccupied. Plan the remediation before beginning work. Resources for
remediation of buildings and homes with mold are provided by NIOSH, the New York City Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene, B& [PDF - 72 KB] [4 the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), [4 and CDC.

3. After an assessment has confirmed that mold and moisture are not detected (Step 2a), OR after remediation has been
completed (Step 2b), a building HVAC system that has not been active during a prolonged shutdown should be
operated for at least 48 to 72 hours (known as a “flush out” period) before occupants return.

a. During this period, open outdoor air dampers to the maximum setting that still allows desired indoor air
temperatures.

b. If an odor is detected that suggests mold growth (such as a musty smell) after the “flush out” period, look for
mold that may not have been identified earlier. If mold is found, conduct remediation as described in Step 2b.

c. Continue the “flush out” process until no odors are apparent.

d. The condition of HVAC filters used during the “flush out” period should be carefully assessed prior to building
occupancy and replaced with new or clean filters as necessary.

A. After a building is reopened and occupied, routine (e.g., weekly) checks of the HVAC system are recommended to
ensure operating efficiency.
a. During HVAC checks, inspect and replace filters as indicated or needed.

b. The frequency of HVAC system checks can be gradually reduced (e.g., monthly, quarterly), depending on the
operational and maintenance specifications for the HVAC system.

c. Maintain indoor temperature and relative humidity within ranges recommended in ASHRAE Standard 55-2017,
Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy. 4

5. If no routine HVAC operation and maintenance program is in place for the building, one should be developed and
implemented. At a minimum, consider including the following: ASHRAE Standard 55-2017, Thermal Environmental
Conditions for Human Occupancy 4

a. Inspection and maintenance of HVAC components

b. Calibration of HVAC system controls
c. HVAC testing and balancing

Content adapted from the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health [NIOSH] Heating, Ventilation, and Air
Conditioning [HVAC] Cleaning and Remediation guidance.

Additional information and CDC guidance on controlling dampness issues that result in indoor mold growth, as well as on
renovation and remediation if indoor mold has become an issue is available from NIOSH.

Lead and Copper in Building Water Systems with Low or No Use

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/legionella/building-water-system.html 4/6



Page 330: 5/11/24, 4:36 PM Reopening Buildings After Prolonged Shutdown or Reduced Operation

Metals, such as lead and copper, can enter drinking water in a building from corrosion of a building's plumbing (pipes,
fixtures). Corrosion is a chemical reaction that dissolves or wears away metal from pipes and fixtures. Corrosion may
occur during long periods of low or no water use, leading to potentially high levels of lead or other metals in the building’s
drinking water. Lead is harmful to health, especially for children, as there is no known safe level in children’s blood. For
more information on corrosion and how lead gets into water, visit CDC’s Lead in Drinking Water webpage or EPA's Basic
Information About Lead in Drinking Water website. 4

Additionally, water sitting stagnant (not flowing) in the pipes can make the water chemistry more corrosive over time and
use up any corrosion control chemicals added by water utilities to limit the release of lead and copper. This may further
disturb protective pipe scales or coatings inside plumbing materials. If pipe scales are disrupted, lead and copper could
continue to be released at higher levels until the scales are restored after the building returns to normal operations.

To prevent high levels of lead and copper in the drinking water while there is low or no use of the building, follow EPA’s
Maintaining or Restoring Water Quality in Buildings with Low or No Use [4 guidance. This guidance has strategies to
maintain the water quality in the building and prevent water stagnation. Maintaining water quality will flush potentially
corrosive water and disrupted pipe scale containing lead out of the pipes. It will ensure fresh water containing proper
levels of corrosion control chemicals is brought into the building and help restore any disrupted pipe scales prior to
building opening.

Take additional steps to reduce lead and copper in drinking water. Preventing stagnation does not completely
prevent the release of lead into drinking water and may require additional steps, including:

1. Learn about the water coming into your building.
Contact your water utility if you'd like to receive a copy of their latest annual drinking water quality consumer confidence
report. More information and ways to locate these reports is available from EPA. [4 If your water comes from a private
well or water supply, check with your health department for information on water quality in your area.
2. Test your water for lead.
If you are served by a water utility, they may test your water upon request. You may also contact laboratories certified to
test for lead in water. For information on locating these laboratories, see EPA's list of laboratories included in the National
Lead Laboratory Accreditation Program. 4
3. Sample from faucets used for drinking water or cooking, including drinking fountains, breakroom and/or kitchen
sinks, and any kitchen kettle (large containers used for cooking) filler outlets. Do not sample from faucets not used for
drinking water or cooking, such as sinks in janitor closets or outdoor hoses.

4. Use cold water.

Use only cold water for drinking and cooking. Water that comes out of the tap warm or hot can have higher levels of lead.
Remember, boiling water does not remove lead from water.

5. Clean your aerators.

Regularly clean faucet screens (also known as aerators). Sediment, debris, and lead particles can collect in your aerator. If
lead particles are caught in the aerator, lead can get into your water.

6. Use filters properly.

If you use filters, make sure they are certified to remove lead. Follow manufacturer instructions for installation and
maintenance. Replace filter cartridges before they expire to maintain their effectiveness. Do not run hot water through
filters. Find more information about choosing a filter certified to reduce lead on EPA's website. [4

1 For example, a building potable water system with extensive dead-legs, low disinfectant residuals, tepid hot water

temperatures, minimal water flow, and an established Legionella biofilm might promote substantial Legionella growth
and dissemination in weeks or months. In contrast, a building with an efficiently designed potable water system that

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/legionella/building-water-system.html 5/6



Page 331: 5/11/24, 4:36 PM Reopening Buildings After Prolonged Shutdown or Reduced Operation

maintains high disinfectant residuals, elevated hot water temperatures, regular water flow, and has no
preexisting Legionella population may not support Legionella colonization at all.

? For example, a building that is damp and has poor ventilation in a humid region might develop mold growth in a few
days that will proliferate unless these conditions change. In contrast, a building that is dry and well-ventilated in a arid
climate might not develop significant mold growth for weeks, months, or at all.

3 For example, a building potable water system with a lead service line, lead-soldered plumbing fittings, elevated water
temperature, and low mineral content would create conditions conducive for lead to leach into the water in a few hours.
In contrast, a building water system constructed with lead-free plumbing materials and supplied with water that contains
corrosion control chemicals would prevent metals from leaching into the water system and reduce or eliminate exposure.

Related Pages

e NIOSH Workplace Solutions: Preventing Occupational Exposure to Legionella BR [PDF - 575 KB]
e¢ CDC Model Aquatic Health Code

e¢ CDC Healthcare Water System Repair and Recovery Following a Boil Water Advisory or Disruption of Water Supply

More Information

e ASHRAE Standard 188: Legionellosis Risk Management for Building Water Systems 4

e ASHRAE Guideline 12: Minimizing the Risk of Legionellosis Associated with Building Water Systems [4
¢ Cooling Technology Institute Legionellosis Guideline 2008 (WTP148) BR [PDF - 218 KB] 4

¢ Cooling Technology Institute Legionellosis Guideline 2020 (GLD159) 4

e EPA Maintaining or Restoring Water Quality in Buildings with Low or No Use 4

e American Water Works Association: Responding to Water Stagnation in Buildings with Reduced or No Water Use BB
[PDF - 2.5 MB] 4

Page last reviewed: July 22, 2021

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/legionella/building-water-system.html



Page 332: 5/11/24, 4:22 PM Reproductive and Birth Outcomes | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

CDC Centers for Disease —
betes Control and Prevention

Reproductive and Birth Outcomes

We Track That

The Tracking Network collects and displays data on reproductive and birth outcomes including fertility, prematurity, infant
deaths (neonatal, post-neonatal, perinatal, infant deaths), low birthweight, and sex ratio. Reproductive and birth outcomes
may be different across geographic areas due to access to care, level of care and a woman's personal and behavioral
characteristics, and environmental exposures. Providing these data through the Tracking Network can improve surveillance
methods in order to better understand trends over time and place, and to better understand the role that environmental
exposures play in reproductive and infant health problems.

Types of Data

Reproductive and birth outcome data on the Tracking Network are provided by CDC’s National Vital Statistics System from
local and state vital statistics systems (birth, death, and fetal death records) and the U.S. Census Bureau [4. The Tracking
Network collects data and information on the following reproductive and birth outcome indicators:

Fertility

This indicator looks at the total fertility rate (TFR). The TFR is the number of births that a hypothetical group of 1,000
women would have if they experienced throughout their childbearing years. This indicator uses age-specific birth rates,
which controls for variation in birth rates due to age and difference in the average age of all women between states and
counties. This indicator provides background information about how fertility varies geographically and over time. These
data are available at the state and county level.

Prematurity among Singleton Births

This indicator tracks the occurrence of premature single births. This indicator can be used to identify trends and patterns
in premature births. It can also be used to evaluate the effectiveness of public health actions and interventions for
preventing prematurity. These data are available at the state and county level.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ReproductiveandBirthOutcomes.htm

115



Page 333: 5/11/24, 4:22 PM Reproductive and Birth Outcomes | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Low Birthweight among Singleton Births

This indicator tracks the occurrence of low birth weight (LBW) among full-term, single birth newborns. It can be used to
track the perinatal health because LBW is an important predictor of perinatal morbidity and mortality. It can also be used
to evaluate the effectiveness of public health actions and interventions for preventing LBW. Baseline data can be used to
monitor changes or trends. These data are available at the state and county (or census tract at state level where
appropriate) level. .

Infant Mortality

This indicator helps to identify populations with higher rates of infant mortality for all infants (under 1 year of age),
neonates (infants younger than 28 days), perinates (infants at 28 weeks gestation to younger than 7 days old), and post-
neonates (infants aged 28 days to < 1 year). These data can be used to assist with targeting outreach intervention
activities. It can also be used to improve our understanding of geographic variation, time trends, and demographic
patterns of infant death. These data are available at the state and county level.

Sex Ratio

This indicator can be used to monitor the proportion of males to females. Baseline data can be used to determine if the
proportion of males is changing over time. These data are available at the state and county level.

Data Highlight

“) [? — 0 eat a

Soe See a ee | PL Ue | eee oe ee) rf

lly
“lng

Mexico |

Add layers to any map.
Click on the gear icon to select layers: surface smoke, current radar, transportation noise, active Atlantic cyclones. Try it!

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ReproductiveandBirthOutcomes.htm



Page 334: 5/11/24, 4:22 PM Reproductive and Birth Outcomes | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Data in Action

Providing reproductive and birth outcome data through the Tracking Network can improve surveillance methods by creating

indicators that can be linked to environmental exposure or hazard data that are not being collected by existing surveillance
systems. In addition, this data can be used to:

e Inform public health prevention actions, interventions, and policy.
e Inform the public regarding risk factors requiring management or mitigation.
e Understand the geographic distribution and trends in reproductive and birth outcomes.

e Evaluate the effectiveness of existing and new prevention programs.

Read this success story to learn about the reproductive and birth outcomes related work happening in our funded Tracking
Programs:

California

Learn More

e Reproductive Health

e Pregnancy

Tracking Resources

e Resources for Maternal and Child Health Professionals
Related Content Areas

e Air Quality

e Biomonitoring: Population Exposure

e Pesticide Exposures

e¢ Hormone Disorders

e Birth Defects

e¢ Developmental Disabilities

Data Explorer

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ReproductiveandBirthOutcomes.htm

3/5



Page 335: 5/11/24, 4:22 PM

x

Reproductive and Birth Outcomes | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

larger” feceg & i eee
rem
Ce ee
denna Payee oe ed
dae Pee are Bes
fale ee oe oe ey Gadel
jared es Be

Gade Poe oe ee ey Bs has.

Aik Pee ees

dees Pyare pr Bees

date Pe ere are eis

et ee
Ceci

ve yee ee

View data in simple charts

Peed
Dr oe ed

bem pe wk
Pe ceed tol ech
Poarcerl col wciaiis

filed = a

iar oe a
aa”) a

—

ce

FE Ae eS

E SER SS oe Po SS

me be ec 0 ed ee

A a ss sR a

rt 2b ee ee eed eee el ee

el ely 2 ei 2 ies La 2 ee er el

OP Br ee waeig Tsai ss Ha UE ss Ee a PS

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ReproductiveandBirthOutcomes.htm

45



Page 336: 5/11/24, 4:22 PM

API

Reproductive and Birth Outcomes | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/ReproductiveandBirthOutcomes.htm

5/5



Page 337: 5/11/24, 4:35 PM Safe Water Funding | EHS | CDC

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Environmental Health Services (EHS) Home

Safe Water Funding Information

Learn about historical CDC Safe Water funding to environmental health (EH) programs in health departments across the
nation.

Strengthening Environmental Health Capacity (EHC) - CDC-RFA-EH20-2005
Funding recipients, FYs 2020-2025

Learn more about EHC projects.

CDC funded recipients for projects focusing on

e Improving access to safe drinking water including development, implementation, and evaluation of interventions to
address risks to human health in
© Private wells and

© Small community water systems.

e Developing comprehensive and effective programs to prevent hazards and harmful exposures in
© Treated recreational water facilities (swimming pools, spas, water parks, spray fountains) and

o Untreated waters designated for recreational use and managed by EH service programs (marine, estuarine,
Great Lakes, inland waters).

Environmental Health Services Support for Public Health Drinking Water Programs to Reduce Drinking Water
Exposures - CDC-RFA-EH15-1507

Funding recipients, FYs 2015-2020

CDC funded health department drinking water programs to address problems with private drinking water systems in

their communities. These systems include private (or household) wells, cisterns, water storage tanks, and trucked water.

This funding encouraged health departments to strengthen and improve their programs by

e Identifying gaps in their current program using the Environmental Public Health Performance Standards.

e Taking actions to address identified gaps and reduce exposures to contaminants.

Improving state and local capacity to assess and manage risks associated with private wells and other small
drinking-water systems by using the Environmental Health Specialist Network (EHS-Net) - CDC-RFA-EH13-1301

Funding: FYs 2013-2015
CDC funded 11 health departments to count and gather data on private wells and other drinking water systems not

regulated under the Safe Drinking Water Act: Duval County (Florida), Cerro Gordo County (lowa), and the states of
Connecticut, Florida, Louisiana, Maine, New Hampshire, New Mexico, New York, Ohio, and Oregon.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/funding.html

1/2



Page 338: 5/11/24, 4:35 PM Safe Water Funding | EHS | CDC

Revitalizing Core Environmental Health Programs through the Environmental Health Specialists Network (EHS-
Net): Delivering Environmental Health Services - CDC-RFA-EH10-1001

Funding: FYs 2010-2013

CDC funded two states (New York and Tennessee) and two counties (Cerro Gordo County [lowa] and San Mateo County
[California]) for projects on private wells and other water topics.

2019 Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Prevention and Control of Emerging Infectious Diseases (ELC) -
CDC-RFA-CK19-1904

Funding recipients, FYs 2019-2024

CDC funded 37 state and local health departments to build capacity for Legionnaires’ disease prevention and response.
Recipients are working to

e Enhance case surveillance and reporting for Legionnaires’ disease
e Improve environmental assessment and outbreak response

e Increase use of water management programs compliant with industry standards

PPHF 2016: Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity Program - Emerging Infections Programs - Financed in part by
2016 Prevention and Public Health Funds - CDC-RFA-CK14-1401

Funding: FYs 2016-2018

In FY 2018, CDC funded 23 state and local public health agencies through the Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity (ELC)
cooperative agreement to improve Legionnaires’ disease prevention and outbreak response capacity: California,
Colorado, Connecticut, District of Columbia, Georgia, Illinois, Los Angeles County, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota,
Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York State, New York City, Ohio, Philadelphia, Tennessee, Texas, Utah,
Virginia, and Washington.

In FY 2017, CDC funded 14 state and local public health agencies through the ELC cooperative agreement to improve
Legionnaires’ disease prevention and outbreak response capacity: California, Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, Michigan,
Minnesota, Nevada, New York State, New York City, Ohio, Philadelphia, Tennessee, Virginia, and Washington.

In FY 2016, CDC funded 10 state and local public health agencies through the ELC cooperative agreement to improve

Legionnaires’ disease prevention and outbreak response capacity: Colorado, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Nevada,
New York State, New York City, Ohio, Philadelphia, and Washington.

Page last reviewed: June 14, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/funding.html



Page 339: 5/11/24, 1:59 PM Signs & Symptoms of Exposure to Sulfur Mustard | NCEH | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Chemical Weapons Elimination Home

Signs & Symptoms of Exposure to Sulfur Mustard

Exposure to sulfur mustard is usually not fatal, however, it can cause long term health effects, including cancer You may not
know right away that exposure to sulfur mustard has happened as there may or may not be a smell or chemical odor. If you
handle discarded military munitions, it is recommended that you follow up with a healthcare provider, even if you do not
think you have been exposed.

You may not have signs or symptoms immediately after exposure— they may appear up to 24 to 48 hours later. If you or a
coworker are exposed to liquid from the munition, rinse your eyes thoroughly with clean water for at least 20 minutes and

wash your skin and hair with soap and water being careful not to scratch or break the skin and to seek immediate medical
attention.

Sulfur mustard can have the following effects:
SKIN: redness and itching of the skin (2 to 48 hours after exposure); may change to yellow blisters.

EYES: irritation, pain, swelling, and tearing (3 to 12 hours after a mild to moderate exposure; 1 to 2 hours after a severe
exposure). Severe exposure may also lead to light sensitivity, severe pain, or blindness lasting up to 10 days.

RESPIRATORY: runny nose, sneezing, hoarseness, bloody nose, sinus pain, shortness of breath, and cough (12 to 24
hours after a mild exposure; within 2 to 4 hours of a severe exposure).

DIGESTIVE: abdominal pain, diarrhea, fever, nausea, and vomiting.
BONE MARROW: decreased formation of blood cells (aplastic anemia) or decreased red or white blood cells and platelets

(pancytopenia) leading to weakness, bleeding, and infections.

* Showing these signs and symptoms does not necessarily mean you have been exposed to sulfur mustard. For more information on sulfur
mustard visit https://www.cdc.gov/chemicalemergencies/factsheets/sulfur-mustard-mustard-gas.html or
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/ershdb/emergencyresponsecard_29750008.html

Take this flyer with you to the healthcare provider

Vessel Name: Vessel #: Time/Date:
Employee:

| may have been exposed to a sea-disposed chemical warfare blister agent such as sulfur or nitrogen mustard or
lewisite.

OSHA Best Practices for HOSPITAL-BASED FIRST RECEIVERS OF VICTIMS from Mass Casualty Incidents Involving the
Release of Hazardous Substances. https://www.osha.gov/sites/default/files/firstreceivers_hospital.pdf B 4%

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/sulfur-mustard-postcard.htm



Page 340: 5/11/24, 1:59 PM Signs & Symptoms of Exposure to Sulfur Mustard | NCEH | CDC

CDC helps connect providers with a network of laboratory and emergency response professionals who can assist with

identifying the chemical agents and measuring human exposure levels. Contact 800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636) or go to
https://emergency.cdc.gov/chemical/lab.asp.

Additional clinical guidance is available from the National Institutes of Health's Chemical Emergency Medical
Management website https://chemm.hhs.gov/mustard_prehospital_mmg.htm [4 .

Report the incident to the U.S. Coast Guard: 1-800-424-8802
Follow your state’s protocol for activation of the emergency response system.

Report food protection issues to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration: 1-888-INFO-FDA (1-888-463-6332) Option #1

Last Reviewed: March 5, 2019

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/demil/sulfur-mustard-postcard.htm

2/2



Page 341: 5/11/24, 2:05 PM Sources of Lead | Lead | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Home

Sources of Lead Exposure

Lead can be found throughout a child’s environment.

e Homes built before 1978 (when lead-based paints were banned) probably contain lead-based paint. When the paint
peels and cracks, it makes lead dust. Children can be exposed to lead when they swallow or breathe in lead dust.

e Certain water pipes may contain lead.
e Lead can be found in some products such as toys and jewelry.
e Lead is sometimes in candies or traditional home remedies.

e Certain jobs and hobbies involve working with lead-based products, like stain glass work, and may cause parents to bring
lead into the home.

e Children who live near airports may be exposed to lead in air and soil from aviation gas used in piston engine aircrafts.

Explore these sources of lead in the environment

> ~4 Lead in Paint

od, Lead in Drinking Water
4

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources.htm

1/2



Page 342: 5/11/24, 2:05 PM Sources of Lead | Lead | CDC

Ww Lead in Foods, Cosmetics, and Medicines
[zea] Lead in Soil
‘en* Lead in Consumer Products

Lead in Jobs, Hobbies, or Other Activities

BP

Last Reviewed: January 5, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/sources.htm

2/2



Page 343: 5/11/24, 2:11 PM Standard Surveillance Definitions and Classifications | Lead | CDC

Standard Surveillance Definitions and Classifications

CDC applies the following nationally consistent standard definitions and classifications for blood lead surveillance data
from all states. A child may be screened in multiple years or even multiple times within a given year. However, in CDC
data tables, a child is only counted once per each year based on their highest blood lead level.

These definitions are to be used for classifying blood lead surveillance data. However, decisions about the timing and
sampling method for use in confirmatory and follow up testing should be made based on CDC's Recommended Actions
Based on Blood Lead Level.

Definitions

e Test: Any blood lead draw (capillary, venous or unknown sample type) on a child <16 years of age that produces a
quantifiable result and is analyzed by a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)-certified facility or an
approved (CLIA waived) portable device.

e Test type: A blood lead test may be collected for screening, confirmation, or follow-up.
e Sample type: A blood lead test may be collected as a venous, capillary, or unknown blood specimen type.
e Screening test: A blood lead test for a child age <72 months who previously did not have a confirmed elevated BLL.

¢ Confirmed BLL 2 CDC's blood lead reference value: A child with one venous blood test > 3.5 ug/dL or two capillary
blood tests > 3.5 yg/dL drawn within 12 weeks of each other.

e Unconfirmed BLL = CDC’s blood lead reference value: A single capillary blood lead test > 3.5 yg/dL or two capillary
tests > 3.5 ug/dL drawn more than 12 weeks apart.

e Percent of children with BLLs = CDC’s blood lead reference value: The number of children less than 72 months of
age with a blood lead level > 3.5 g/dL divided by the number of children less than 72 months of age tested for blood
lead, multiplied by 100.

e Percent of children tested: The number of children less than 72 months of age tested for blood lead divided by the
total number of children less than 72 months of age within a geographic unit (i.e., county or state) based on annual
intercensal estimates for the most recent U.S. Census data, multiplied by 100. (Also referred to as “screening

penetrance’).
Page last reviewed: October 27, 2021

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/data/case-definitions-classifications.htm

11



Page 344: 5/11/24, 4:30 PM Sunlight & UV | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Centers for Disease —
Control and Prevention

Sunlight & UV

We Track That

The Tracking Network includes data on exposure to sunlight and UV in the United States. These data come from Emory
University’s Environmental Remote Sensing Group at the Rollins School of Public Health. Additional data sources include
LegiScan [4 and the American Society for Dermatologic Surgery Association 4.

Types of Data

Sunlight Exposure
This indicator provides state and county level data on monthly and annual average exposure to sunlight.

UV Radiation Exposure
This indicator provides state and county level data on monthly and annual average doses of UV irradiance measured daily
and at noon.

Sunlight/UV Vulnerability and Preparedness
This indicator provides state-level data on laws regarding sunscreen use in schools and indoor tanning restrictions for
individuals younger than 18 years.

Data in Action

Sunlight and UV exposure data can be used to:
e Understand how solar radiation levels are changing across geography and time.

e Identify areas where intensity may be increasing.

e Provide data to help public health officials make informed decisions about planning and implementing programs and
services for people living in regions of high exposure.

https://www.cdce.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/SunlightUV.htm#print 1/4



Page 345: 5/11/24, 4:30 PM Sunlight & UV | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

e Determine which states have laws or policies in place to help reduce exposure to sunlight and UV, particularly among

minors.

Monitoring, collecting, and disseminating sunlight and UV exposure information is the first step to developing policies and

educational resources that can help prevent the harmful effects related to excessive exposures.

Data Highlight

ee ne ee eee ae en hen Speen ME Beda" Batl-j Mintel Mingle
5

gy Tea et rie ie en Tipster part cig. ipecpl a pd

re ae res TR oi ie 2 a a ae ie Ae a Ee Be

SS = Ss ea) a ee hae hee
Caimct fee es eT ey ee ee ee ed ee be
Progra : — ie
te es
ea a |

TA ACKIAG —

CDC's Heat and Health Tracker:
Explore how extreme heat affects your county, populations that are at risk, and resources for response.

Learn More

e Ultraviolet Radiation
e Skin Cancer
e Sun Exposure, Traveler’s Health

e UV Index: National Weather Service 4

Tracking Resources

e Faces of Tracking: Emma's Story

Related Content Areas
e Cancer

e Climate Change
e Drought

e Heat Stress Illness

https://www.cdce.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/SunlightUV.htm#print

Pi

2/4



Page 346: 5/11/24, 4:30 PM

Explore Sunlight & UV Data

Data Explorer

a a

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdce.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/SunlightUV.htm#print

Sunlight & UV | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

3/4



Page 347: 5/11/24, 4:30 PM

Gorter fee 6 dal eee
ree
cd eile ee cs Bb

Cas

Cnicey

Sunlight & UV | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

mam TH

Pep mee an pees ape ead eee a a

Rater of ec ee ee ee eee. eed oe!

Pace col acheter ier edo. ic eee Sere be ne Bae) ee |
Per ee el ee ee ed eS a ees eee eee ee ee eT ad
Peco cd Mech ea eSB AH ee a ed Tn +

fe OE We Bo ee Be Dl

emcee RL eM cm a Ey A Rd rl AD ad wt +

Prard cf ca a ee i ee)
aT”

Pec aches. i ei ee oe ee oie Ook cel or. en eed ev 1! arc
oe

Wier hcl i in hPa ded el sa LT ri

Par ot on ae ee ee

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: October 21, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/SunlightUV.htm#print

44



Page 348: 5/11/24, 4:37 PM SWPI - Safe Water Program Improvement e-Learning Series | EHS | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Environmental Health Services (EHS) Home

Safe Water Program Improvement e-Learning Series
(SWPI)

Take CDC's Safe Water Program Improvement e-Learning Series (SWPI) for safer well water through stronger public
health programs.

SWPI helps health department programs strengthen services to people who use wells, cisterns, springs, and other private
drinking water systems not covered by the Safe Drinking Water Act. Oversight for these systems vary, but core elements of
successful, sustainable programs are similar. SWPI walks through the 10 Essential Environmental Public Health Services and
the Environmental Public Health Performance Standards, and provides examples of using them to identify and fill program
gaps in these types of drinking water programs.

Get Started Today
1. Go to the Tulane PACE learning management system [4 and create an account (or log in if you already have one). Note:
You can also register through TRAIN. [4

2. Select a course to get started.

What Are the Benefits of This Training?

e It’s free and flexible: Take the courses you want, when you want in this online program.
e It’s practical: Improve drinking water in your community by improving your program.

e It’s strategic: Gain experience with the framework used in accreditation of health departments as you apply the 10
Essential Environmental Public Health Services and the Environmental Public Health Performance Standards to your
drinking water program.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/elearn/swpi.html



Page 349: 5/11/24, 4:37 PM SWPI - Safe Water Program Improvement e-Learning Series | EHS | CDC

What Topics Are Addressed?

Diagnose
and
Investigate

Inform,
Educate,
Empower

Enforce
Laws

Mobilize
Community
Partnerships

Develop
Policies

10 Essential Environmental
Public Health Services

SWPI includes 9 courses. Take all of them or pick and choose (the first one is required, then take courses in any order, but we
recommend taking them in order for the greatest benefit):

¢ 101 - Introduction: The 10 Essential Environmental Public Health Services and Unregulated Drinking Water Programs
e 102 - Assessment: Monitor Health

e 103 - Assessment: Diagnose and Investigate

e 104 - Policy Development: Inform, Educate, Empower, and Mobilize

e 105 - Policy Development: Policies and Plans

e 106 - Assurance: Laws and Regulations

e 107 - Assurance: Linking People to Services

e 108 - Assurance: Assuring a Competent Workforce

e 109 - Assurance: Evaluation and Research

What Are People Saying?

| plan to...“(u)tilize the 10 Essential services! | had no idea they even existed specifically for the Environmental Health realm of
Public Health.”
-Pilot Tester comment

“This course will allow me to think more on the sources of unregulated drinking water instead of totally focusing on the public
sources of water. It will also help me be ready with answers to questions from people using unregulated drinking water
sources.”

-Pilot Tester comment

We tested this course among drinking water and other environmental health staff:

e More than 4 out of 5 identified specific actions they could take in their job as a result of SWPI.

e 9in 10 said they would recommend SWPI to a colleague.

How Long Does It Take?

For pilot testers, the average time to finish the courses ranged from just over 1 hour for the shortest course to just over 2
hours for the longest.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/elearn/swpi.html



Page 350: 5/11/24, 4:37 PM SWPI - Safe Water Program Improvement e-Learning Series | EHS | CDC

Who Developed It?

Several groups and individuals worked together to create this training series. CDC's National Center for Environmental Health
collaborated with the National Network of Public Health Institutes, Texas Health Institute, Tulane University, NEHA, and
additional subject-matter experts in performance improvement and drinking water.

Did You Know?

e About 1 in 9 American residents get their drinking water from a private well.

e About 1 in 5 sampled private wells had contaminants at levels that could affect health.

Key Terms

10 Essential Environmental Public Health Services - actions to protect and improve environmental public health.
These services are adapted from the 10 Essential Public Health Services, a core framework used in voluntary
accreditation of health departments.

Environmental Public Health Performance Standards - a set of standards that describe the optimal performance and
capacity for environmental public health systems and programs. These standards complement that National Public
Health Performance Standards and allow for in-depth assessment of how these systems and programs provide
communities with the 10 Essential Environmental Public Health Services.

Unregulated Drinking Water - private wells, cisterns, springs, and other drinking water sources not covered by the
federal Safe Drinking Water Act (which outlines standards for protecting public water supplies). Some of these systems
may be covered by state or local regulations.

Want More?

Explore these CDC resources for more information.

e Private Well Resources

e Safe Water Program

e Environmental Health Practice Resources

e 10 Essential Environmental Public Health Services

e Environmental Public Health Performance Standards
Last Reviewed: November 14, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/elearn/swpi.html



Page 351: 5/11/24, 2:14 PM Temperature Extremes | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Climate and Health Home

Temperature Extremes

Extreme heat events have long threatened public health in the United States. Many cities, including St. Louis, Philadelphia,
Chicago, and Cincinnati, have suffered dramatic increases in death rates during heat waves. Deaths result from heat stroke
and related conditions, but also from cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease, and cerebrovascular disease. Heat waves
are also associated with increased hospital admissions for cardiovascular, kidney, and respiratory disorders. Extreme summer
heat is increasing in the United States, and climate projections indicate that extreme heat events will be more frequent and
intense in coming decades.

Some heat-related illness and death risks have diminished in recent decades, possibly due to better forecasting, heat-health
early warning systems, and/or increased access to air conditioning for the U.S. population. However, extreme heat events
remain a cause of preventable death nationwide. Urban heat islands, combined with an aging population and increased
urbanization, are projected to increase the vulnerability of urban populations to heat-related health impacts in the future.

Milder winters resulting from a warming climate can reduce illness, injuries, and deaths associated with cold and snow.
Vulnerability to winter weather depends on many non-climate factors, including housing, age, and baseline health. While
deaths and injuries related to extreme cold events are projected to decline due to climate change, these reductions are not
expected to compensate for the increase in heat-related deaths.

Watch a short video about climate-related health effects from extreme heat, and what communities can do to prepare.

CDC Temperature Extremes Resources:
e Extreme Cold - Prepare for winter storms, prevent cold temperature-related health problems, and protect yourself
during all stages of a winter storm.
e Extreme Heat - helpful tips, information, and resources to help you stay safe in the extreme heat this summer

e Extreme Heat Adaptation StoryMap [4 - learn how the CRSCI Grant Recipients are preparing for and responding to
increasing temperatures

e Extreme Heat Can Impact Our Health in Many Ways BB [PDF - 107 KB]
e Heat Exposure and Cardiovascular Health: A Summary for Health Departments 9 [PDF - 7 MB]

e Heat & Health Tracker - Explore how extreme heat affects your county, populations that are at risk, and resources for
response. A link to a fact sheet with more information about the Heat & Health Tracker is provided here
[PDF - 433 KB].

e Heat Vulnerability and Projection Data - Tracking Portal - interactive maps, tables, and charts

e Social Media on Extreme Heat

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/temperature_extremes.htm



Page 352: 5/11/24, 2:14 PM Temperature Extremes | CDC

Page last reviewed: September 6, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/temperature_extremes.htm 2/2



Page 353: 5/11/24, 2:07 PM Testing Children for Lead Poisoning | Lead | CDC
Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
A Control and Prevention

Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Home

Testing Children for Lead Poisoning

A blood lead test is the best way to find out if a child has lead poisoning. A child with lead poisoning may not have visible
signs or symptoms. Many children who have lead poisoning look and act healthy. Parents can talk to their child's
healthcare provider about getting a blood lead test if their child may have been exposed to lead.

All children who are at risk for lead exposure should be tested for lead poisoning. Some children are more likely to be
exposed to lead than others. These include children who

e live or spend time in a house or building built before 1978
e are from low-income households
e are immigrants, refugees, or recently adopted from less developed countries

e live or spend time with someone who works with lead or has hobbies that expose them to lead

Parents should talk to their child's healthcare provider about whether their child needs to be tested for lead. The child's
healthcare provider may ask questions to see if the child is at risk for lead poisoning. The best way to know if a child has
been exposed to lead is to have their blood tested.

Children enrolled in Medicaid are required to get tested for lead at ages 12 and 24 months, or age 24-72 months if they
have no record of ever being tested. For children not enrolled in Medicaid, CDC recommends focusing testing efforts on
high-risk neighborhoods and children.

A healthcare provider will test a child’s blood for lead. During a blood lead test, a small amount of blood is taken from the
finger, heel, or arm and tested for lead.

e A finger-prick or heel-prick (capillary) sample is usually the first step to determine if a child has lead in their blood.
While finger-prick tests can provide fast results, they also can produce higher results if lead on the skin is captured in
the sample. For this reason, a finger-prick test that shows a blood lead level at or above CDC's blood lead reference
value is usually followed by a second test to confirm it.

e Avenous blood draw takes blood from the child’s vein. Blood collected from the vein is less likely to be contaminated
with lead during the collection process. However, venous blood cannot currently be tested for lead at the point of
care. Because of this, it may take a few days to receive results from the laboratory. A healthcare provider may order a
venous blood draw to confirm the blood lead level seen in a test. The table below shows when a child with lead in
their blood should receive a venous blood draw to confirm their blood lead level.

Recommended Schedule for Obtaining a Confirmatory Venous Sample

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/testing-children-for-lead-poisoning.htm



Page 354: 5/11/24, 2:07 PM Testing Children for Lead Poisoning | Lead | CDC

Capillary Blood Lead Level (g/dL) Time to Confirmation Testing
>3.5-9 Within 3 months

10-19 Within 1 month

20-44 Within 2 weeks

245 Within 48 hours

Healthcare providers and most local health departments can test for lead in the blood. Many private insurance policies
cover the cost of testing for lead in the blood. The cost of blood lead testing for children enrolled in Medicaid is covered
by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

A blood lead test shows how much lead is in a child's blood. The amount of lead in blood is referred to as the blood lead
level, which is measured in micrograms of lead per deciliter of blood (g/dL).

Any amount of lead in the blood means the child has been exposed to lead and may be still exposed to lead in their
environment. The healthcare provider recommends follow-up actions and care based on the child's blood lead level.

CDC uses a blood lead reference value of 3.5 yg/dL to identify children with blood lead levels that are higher than most
children’s levels in the United States. However, no safe level of lead in children has been identified. Even low levels of lead
in the blood can negatively impact a child’s health and should be viewed as a concern.

Web pages

¢ Blood Lead Levels in Children - information about children’s blood lead levels
e Blood Lead Reference Value - CDC recommendations on children’s blood lead levels

e Recommended Actions Based on Blood Lead Level - summary of recommendations for follow-up and case
management of children based on confirmed blood lead levels

Fact Sheets

e 5 Things You Can Do §& [PDF - 234 KB] - information on how to help lower elevated blood lead levels, in English
[PDF - 234 KB] and en Espafiol BB [PDF - 166 KB]

e All Children Can Be Exposed to Lead - real-world examples of situations where children have been exposed to lead
(Printable PDF —& [PDF - 1 MB))

e Blood Lead Levels in Children 99 [PDF - 100 KB] - fact sheet with information on blood lead levels in children
¢ CDC's Recommended Terminology When Discussing Children’s Blood Lead Levels BB [PDF - 330 KB]

Videos

e Mission Unleaded: How to Test Children for Lead with Maximum Accuracy - reducing the risk of contamination during
blood collection for lead testing

Scientific Publications

e Ruckart PZ, Jones RL, Courtney JG, LeBlanc TL, Jackson W, Karwowski MP, Cheng P, Allwood P, Svendsen ER, Breysse
PN. Update of the Blood Lead Reference Value — United States, 2021. MMWR. 2021; 70(43):1509-1512.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/testing-children-for-lead-poisoning.htm




Page 355: 5/11/24, 2:07 PM Testing Children for Lead Poisoning | Lead | CDC

e Courtney JG, Chuke SO, Dyke K, Credle K, Lecours C, Egan KB, Leonard M. Decreases in Young Children Who Received
Blood Lead Level Testing During COVID-19 — 34 Jurisdictions, January-May 2020. MMWR. 2021; 70(5):155-161.

Guidelines and Recommendations

e HRSA-CDC Letter on Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention and Blood Lead Testing BR [PDF - 213 KB] - Ina joint
letter, HRSA and CDC provide information for healthcare providers regarding childhood lead poisoning prevention and
blood lead testing.

e¢ CDC. Recommendations for Blood Lead Screening of Medicaid-Eligible Children Aged 1-5 Years: an Updated Approach
to Targeting a Group at High Risk. MMWR. August 7, 2009; 58(RRO9);1-11.

e CDC. Interpreting and Managing Blood Lead Levels <10 g/dL in Children and Reducing Childhood Exposures to Lead:
Recommendations of CDC's Advisory Committee on Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention. MMWR. November 2, 2007;
56(RRO8):1-14;16.

e Screening Young Children for Lead Poisoning: Guidance for State and Local Public Health Officials, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (1997) B& [PDF - 1.3 MB] - The policy outlined in the document has two main purposes: to
increase screening and follow-up care of children who most need these services, and to help communities pursue the
most appropriate approach to the prevention of childhood lead poisoning.

Last Reviewed: January 20, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/testing-children-for-lead-poisoning.htm

3/3



Page 356: 5/11/24, 2:33 PM Tips for Healthy Cruising | VSP | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Vessel Sanitation Program Home

Tips for Healthy Cruising

AASE | Deutsch | English | Espafiol | Frangais | Itliano | Portugués | Tagalog

Help Limit the Spread of Acute Gastroenteritis

¢ Report your illness if you're sick.
b)) © Call the ship’s medical facility as soon as possible
and follow the medical staff's recommendations.

Wash your hands often, especially after
using the toilet and before eating or drinking. ay

a Take care of yourself,
© Get plenty of rest and drink plenty of water.
> Resting helps rebuild your immune system.
° Drinking water helps prevent debydration.

Leave the area if you see someone get sick
(vomiting or diarrhea). &
* Report it to cruise staff if they are not already aware.

a OS Oopervment of
Simoes
KG oc es
‘ pe

Each year millions of U.S. citizens enjoy cruise vacations. In 2016, approximately 11.5 million passengers embarked from
North American ports for their cruise vacation (from Cruise Lines International Association). Traveling on cruise ships exposes
people to new environments and high volumes of people, including other travelers. This exposure can create the risk for
illness from contaminated food, or water or, more commonly, through person-to-person contact.

Follow these tips for healthy cruising.

If you're sick, report your illness.

Before your voyage:
- Ask your cruise line if there are alternative cruising options.
- Consult a doctor to find out whether it is safe for you to sail.

During your voyage, call the ship’s medical facility and follow the medical staff's recommendations.

Wash your hands often!

Why: Avoid exposing yourself and others to anything that may cause illnesses and spread germs.

When: Wash your hands often but especially after using the toilet and before eating or smoking.

Take care of yourself.

Get plenty of rest and drink plenty of water.

Why: Resting helps rebuild your immune system. Drinking water helps prevent dehydration.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/pub/healthycruising/tips.htm



Page 357: 5/11/24, 2:33 PM Tips for Healthy Cruising | VSP | CDC

Leave the area if you see someone get sick (vomiting or diarrhea).

Report it to cruise staff if they are not already aware.

CDC's Vessel Sanitation Program helps the cruise industry control and prevent the spread of gastrointestinal illnesses
aboard cruise ships and assists them by monitoring ships if they have an outbreak. Learn more about CDC's Vessel

Sanitation Program.

Last Reviewed: December 27, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/pub/healthycruising/tips.htm

2/2



Page 358: 5/11/24, 1:52 PM Tobacco

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Tobacco

Biomonitoring has played a role in the assessment of secondhand smoke (also referred to as environmental tobacco smoke).
CDC's Division of Laboratory Sciences (DLS) houses the Tobacco Laboratory, which investigates both individual and population
exposures to the chemicals in tobacco products. The Laboratory is unique because it measures toxic and addictive substances
in tobacco products, in smoke and other emissions, and in people who use tobacco products or are exposed to secondhand
smoke. No other laboratory in the federal government has these capabilities.

Tobacco smoke contains more than 7,000 chemical components, and at least 250 of these chemicals are harmful to human
health. By looking at all aspects of tobacco use and exposure, scientists in the Tobacco Laboratory are able to obtain a more
accurate understanding of how smokers, non-smokers (through secondhand smoke), and smokeless tobacco users are
exposed to harmful chemicals.

Public Health Impact

The Tobacco Laboratory developed a method for measuring very low levels of cotinine, a nicotine metabolite, as a marker of
exposure for smokers and persons exposed to secondhand smoke. In the early 1990s, the Tobacco Laboratory produced data
showing that 88 percent of the nonsmoking U.S. population was exposed to tobacco smoke. This finding was used as a
justification for restricting smoking in public buildings. The Tobacco Laboratory has continued to measure the population’s
exposure to secondhand smoke and has found that since the 1990s secondhand smoke exposure has dropped dramatically
in all segments of the population.

Tobacco Smoke and Other Emissions

To analyze tobacco smoke and other emissions, the Tobacco Laboratory:

e Uses smoking machines to collect both the particulate matter and gases in mainstream cigarette smoke generated
according to international standards.

e Collects smoke with alternate smoking conditions to examine how differences in smoking alter the delivery of toxic and
addictive constituents.

Tobacco Product Use

To understand how tobacco products are used (topography), the Tobacco Laboratory:

e Looks at how much smoke people draw from cigarettes. This can increase the nicotine they are getting, regardless of
how the package is labeled.

e Studies products to assess how cigarette design influences how people use tobacco products.

e Looks at racial and genetic differences in smoking behavior and nicotine metabolism, or how the body breaks down
nicotine, and how these influence adverse health effects from tobacco use.

Tobacco Markers in the Body

To study the types and levels of tobacco markers in the body, the Tobacco Laboratory:

e Develops laboratory methods to measure tobacco exposure in human blood, saliva, serum, or urine.

https://www.cdc.gov/biomonitoring/tobacco.html



Page 359: 5/11/24, 1:52 PM Tobacco

e Examines the effects of tobacco-related chemicals in at-risk populations (older adults, pregnant women, and children).
e Performs short-term studies looking at different populations affected by tobacco exposure.

e Measures markers related to tobacco use, such as cotinine and the tobacco-specific nitrosamine NNAL, and produces
population-based reference levels segmented by age, sex, and race or ethnicity; this information is then published in
CDC's National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.

e Partners with other leaders in the field of tobacco and smoking research to study specific chemicals in tobacco products
and people.

Future Tobacco Research

For the future, the Tobacco Laboratory plans to:

e Develop short-term markers of the long-term adverse health effects of tobacco use.
e Identify other chemicals in tobacco or product design features that boost or maintain addiction.

e Develop tests to measure major cancer-causing chemicals, pesticides, and other toxic chemicals, such as lead,
chromium, heterocyclic amines, and cyanide, in tobacco products and/or tobacco smoke.

Additional resources

e CDC Office of Smoking Health

¢ CDC Tobacco Laboratory Publications and Products

¢ CDC's Tobacco Laboratory (brochure) BR [PDF - 1,879 KB]

e Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke - Surgeon General’s Report 4

e Tobacco Data and Statistics
Page last reviewed: April 7, 2017

https://www.cdc.gov/biomonitoring/tobacco.html

2/2



Page 360: 5/11/24, 1:54 PM Toxins | National Biomonitoring Program | CDC

CDC Centers for Disease —
betes Control and Prevention

TOXINS

CDC has developed specific and sensitive methods to help diagnose, treat, and prevent diseases caused by toxins. Toxins
from bacteria, fungi, algae, and plants are some of the most deadly chemicals known and represent an ongoing public health
threat.

Laboratory Response to Toxins

In an emergency, the Division of Laboratory Sciences’ advanced laboratory techniques allow scientists to

¢ Deliver results rapidly. CDC's toxin methods are the most rapid tests available, allowing for definitive answers within
hours of receiving the samples.

e Analyze more samples. An equipped laboratory can measure hundreds, or even thousands, of samples each day.

¢ Quantify toxins to track course of infection. Clinicians can use these methods to track the success of the treatment by
looking at the decrease of toxins in the body.

e Characterize various toxin forms and subtypes. The ability to characterize toxins allows scientists to confirm the
likeliness of acommon source of toxin in a natural or terrorist event.

DLS continuously researches toxins and works toward

e Developing new test methods; especially for priority toxins including ricin, abrin, SEB, shiga toxins, gonyantoxins, and
brevetoxins.

e Using advanced technology to diagnose, treat, and prevent toxin related diseases throughout the world, in particular,
toxin laboratory methods have been used on aflatoxin, anthrax, botulism,ricin, saxitoxin and neosaxitoxin cases.

e Transferring its methods to federal, state, and private laboratories to increase testing capacity during emergencies
involving toxins.

Toxins from Bacteria

e Anthrax lethal toxin is produced by Bacillus anthracis. The anthrax toxin proteins, including anthrax lethal factor, work
together to disrupt a cell's defense system.

e Botulinum toxin, produced by Clostridium botulinum, is one of the most poisonous substance known. It causes
botulism, a severe muscle-paralyzing disease, which affects an average of 200 persons living in the United States each
year.

e Pertussis toxin is produced by the Bordetella pertussis bacteria which causes whooping cough.

e Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) is the toxin most often associated with food poisoning.

Toxins from Fungi and Algae

e Aflatoxins are produced by many species of the fungus Aspergillus, which commonly contaminates corn (maize) and
other types of crops during production, harvest, storage or processing. At high doses and over long periods, aflatoxin is
known to cause acute and chronic liver injury and cause liver cancer. Aflatoxins are considered unavoidable
contaminants in the U.S. food supply, especially in corn and peanuts, and levels are regulated by the Food and Drug
Administration.

https://www.cdc.gov/biomonitoring/toxins.html



Page 361: 5/11/24, 1:54 PM Toxins | National Biomonitoring Program | CDC

e Saxitoxin and neosaxitoxin are produced by several species of marine and fresh water algae and blue-green algae
(cyanobacteria). When these organisms are present in high concentrations, the toxins may build up in filter-feeding
shellfish, such as clams and oysters. Paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP) is a severe form of poisoning causing paralysis
and death if left untreated.

e Amanitin toxins are produced by the poisonous death cap mushroom (Amanita phalloides). Health effects may include
liver and kidney failure and death.

e Other toxins from fungi and algae vomitoxin (deoxynivalenol), diacetoxyscirpenol, and T-2 and HT-2 toxins. These
mycotoxins affect up to 25 percent of the world’s grain supply. All of the mycotoxins are considered bioterrorism threat
agents.

Toxins from Plants

e Abrin, found in the seeds of the rosary pea, is one of the most poisonous plant toxins.

e Ricin is a poison found in castor beans. Each year, tons of castor beans are grown to produce castor oil.

Both ricin and abrin work by entering human cells and preventing the cells from making the proteins they need. Without the
proteins, cells die. This is harmful to the whole body, and the patient may die.

Additional Resources

¢ CDC's Laboratory Response to Toxins B& [PDF - 2,163 KB]

e Toxins Publications and Products
Page last reviewed: April 7, 2017

https://www.cdc.gov/biomonitoring/toxins.html

2/2



Page 362: 5/11/24, 4:04 PM Tracking Geographies | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

} D Centers for Disease
C Control and Prevention

National Environmental Public Health Tracking

Tracking Geographies
a | \ZE

rol

Looking at data in different resolutions can help us better understand the connections between health and the places
where we live, work, and play. Resolution is the detail with which a map depicts the location and shape of geographic

features, boundaries, and areas. The Tracking Network allows you visualize data in many different resolutions, and is

working towards getting even more localized, finer resolution data for health and environmental data.

Data by Geo-Political Boundaries

Data by geo-political boundaries is the most common way to view data on the Tracking Network. You may be able to look at
larger or coarser resolution data (national or state), or finer resolution data (county or census tract), depending on the data
set. Finer resolution data can help us identify trends in neighborhoods and can pinpoint areas of concern for a health or
environmental issue.

~

This map shows the same data measure, but at different geographic resolutions. The left is an example of a national by
state geographic resolution and the right is national by county geographic resolution. Looking at data at different
resolutions help identify where there may be differences between locations.

Data by Population-Based Geographies

Some data sets have too few cases to show on a map at finer resolution geo-political geographies. This could be because
there are only a few cases reported for that area, or that it is a rare health condition (such as childhood cancer). If there is a
small number of case counts, data is suppressed or hidden at the geo-political boundary level, such as county level, to protect

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/geographies.htm



Page 363: 5/11/24, 4:04 PM Tracking Geographies | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

the privacy of individuals affected by these conditions. This is especially true in counties and census tracts with low
populations.

To visualize these data sets in a meaningful way, the Tracking Network has developed population-based geographies. This can
be done by combining census tracts or counties to meet a minimum population threshold to display the data. Population-
based geographies are useful to see trends based on populations for many environmental, community, and health data,
especially in areas where there are high or low populations in counties.

The Tracking Network has different population-based geographies:

e State by 5,000 Population
e State by 20,000 Population

The left is an example of a state by county geographic resolution for Colorado, and the right is an example of a state by
20,000 population geographic resolution for Colorado. For areas that are rural, counties are combined to reach the
population minimum of 20,000 people. For areas that are urban, like Denver, smaller areas are created by combining
census tracts to reach the population minimum of 20,000 people.

Explore available data on CDC's Data Explorer using population-based geographies:

© Populations and Vulnerability
= Demographics
= Health Status
= Socioeconomic Status

© Cancer
= Incidence of Breast Cancer

= Incidence of Colorectal Cancer

= Incidence of Lung and Bronchus Cancers
= Incidence of Melanoma

= Incidence of Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma

= Incidence of Prostate Cancer

For more information on how the Tracking Program created the population-based geographies, see the Resources section.

Current Projects and Partnerships in Tracking Geographies

Cancer Registries

CDC's Tracking Program is currently working with The National Program of Cancer Registries (NPCR) to create indicators for
cancer prevalence that will utilize the Tracking Program's population-based geographies.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/geographies.htm



Page 364: 5/11/24, 4:04 PM Tracking Geographies | Tracking | NCEH | CDC.

Special Geographies Developed by Recipients

CDC's Tracking Program provides funding to state and local health departments to develop local tracking networks. Tracking
Program grant recipients in Arizona, New Jersey (4, New York City, and Utah have developed different geographies to better
understand environmental and health data in their jurisdictions.

Hospitalization & Emergency Department Data

Tracking Program grant recipients submit hospitalization and emergency department data for different health concerns for
display on CDC's Tracking Network. CDC is working to display asthma and heart attack data using population-based
geographies.

Resources
e Developing a surveillance system of sub-county data: Finding suitable population thresholds for geographic
aggregations [4 . Spatial and Spatio-temporal Epidemiology. June 2020.

e Lessons Learned From the Environmental Public Health Tracking Sub-County Data Pilot Project 4 . journal of Public
Health Practice and Management. September/October 2019.

e If you'd like to use the population-based geographies for your own activities and research, please visit the EPHTN
Subcounty Github 4

Explore Geographies

Data Explorer

a a

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/geographies.htm

3/4



Page 365: 5/11/24, 4:04 PM Tracking Geographies | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Corton fevge © dal ere

renee fog BH

aR men Pein om ng Be Pte et pee ge er ey ed Ea

dere rye seg eee | Pa od ce ee ee ee. rd ed ed!

dade Popesieres ary Ble | Perce col acieiy pee chee eed eit andres. wo ert Serco bee ne aed a |
Pa Pie Bl Pe ee hel ee de ed ee ee es eee ee ee ee ee ee ed ee
Berek: Peeve ra | Pairk eb A eS a 9! Wd oh
ee ee Bo ee Be al

Paar ak: Peri a ea Re, ame od eee) ieee i (Dad ea ae

dave Payee ere eee | red cd ca ee ed nr LS ad
fata"

dai Peters ere ees Peel aches i ee ee oe ee ee rerio 9 ead or es ed em acl

cme
PAST ied: Persie nhs a ies oe Peek ee i et Pome to
Cakes
dare. Pa ee es Par ot on ae ee ee
Cnicey

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Page last reviewed: February 9, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/geographies.htm



Page 366: 5/11/24, 4:31 PM Transportation | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Espafiol | Other Languages

Home

Transportation

We Track That

The Tracking Network includes transportation-related data from the U.S. Census Bureau and the U.S. Department of
Transportation. These data can help identify the effects transportation may have on our health and environment. They can
help us better understand exposures to air pollution from traffic, factors that may play a role in traffic safety, and health
benefits of using active transportation options.

Types of Data

These indicators provide national, state, county, tribal, and census tract level data on commute times, motor vehicle crashes,
and transportation types.

Commute Time’

This indicator estimates the average one-way commute time for workers and breaks down the number of workers
driving, taking public transit, or walking to work.

Traffic Safety 4 12

This indicator displays the number, rate, and location of motor vehicle crashes as well as calculates the percentage of
motor vehicle crashes involving cyclists or pedestrians.

Types of Transportation to Work'

These data show the number and percent of people aged 16 years and older in a geographic area who used a specific
type of transportation to commute to work.

Footnotes:

1. These data are supplied by the U.S. Census (2020).

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Transportation.htm

114



Page 367: 5/11/24, 4:31 PM Transportation | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

2. Data on motor vehicle-related fatalities come from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS). FARS may slightly underestimate the

number of fatal crashes by not counting off-the-road fatalities and deaths that occur more than 30 days after the crash.

Data Highlight

Add layers to any map.
Click on the gear icon to select layers: surface smoke, current radar, transportation noise, active Atlantic cyclones. Try it!

Data in Action

These transportation data can be used to

¢ demonstrate the impact that changes in commute time can have on related variables, such as air pollution, physical
activity, and traffic safety over time.

e support additional resources or behavior change to reduce motor vehicle crash fatalities, especially among groups more
likely to have serious outcomes, like pedestrians and bicyclists.

e identify communities that have more walking, bicycling, and public transportation trips that can serve as an example to
model policies and provisions to promote active and public transportation.

¢ advocate for resources, transportation infrastructure, and behavior change to increase walking, bicycling, and public
transportation use among commuters.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Transportation.htm

2/4



Page 368: 5/11/24, 4:31 PM

Learn More

e Motor Vehicle Safety at Work
e Transportation Safety

e Transportation Policy Recommendations

Explore Transportation Data

Data Explorer

Create custom data visualizations, save, & share results

Quick Reports

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Transportation.htm

Transportation | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

3/4



Page 369: 5/11/24, 4:31 PM Transportation | Tracking | NCEH | CDC

Corton fevge © dal ere

renee fog BH

aR men Pein om ng Be Pte et pee ge er ey ed Ea

dere rye seg eee | Pa od ce ee ee ee. rd ed ed!

dade Popesieres ary Ble | Perce col acieiy pee chee eed eit andres. wo ert Serco bee ne aed a |
Pa Pie Bl Pe ee hel ee de ed ee ee es eee ee ee ee ee ee ed ee
Berek: Peeve ra | Pairk eb A eS a 9! Wd oh
ee ee Bo ee Be al

Paar ak: Peri a ea Re, ame od eee) ieee i (Dad ea ae

dave Payee ere eee | red cd ca ee ed nr LS ad
fata"

dai Peters ere ees Peel aches i ee ee oe ee ee rerio 9 ead or es ed em acl

cme
PAST ied: Persie nhs a ies oe Peek ee i et Pome to
Cakes
dare. Pa ee es Par ot on ae ee ee
Cnicey

View data in simple charts

API

REQUEST

API

DATA

Access machine-readable data

Last Reviewed: December 8, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/tracking/topics/Transportation.htm



Page 370: 5/11/24, 2:26 PM VSP Gastrointestinal Illness Surveillance | VSP | CDC
Espafiol | Other Languages

Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention

Vessel Sanitation Program Home

VSP Gastrointestinal Illness Surveillance

Learn how we track cases of gastrointestinal illness on cruise ships.

The Vessel Sanitation Program (VSP) maintains an electronic surveillance system that tracks cases of gastrointestinal illnesses
on cruise ships under our jurisdiction. We use this system to help the cruise ship industry prevent and reduce gastrointestinal
illnesses on cruise ships. We monitor the system to observe illness patterns.

How does the surveillance system work?

Cruise ships are required to log and report to VSP the number of passengers and crew members that say they have
symptoms of gastrointestinal illness. Ships are also required to keep a list of all passengers and crew members that have
received or been issued antidiarrheal medication.

Passengers and crew tell ship medical staff they are sick. If it is a reportable case of gastrointestinal illness, it is entered in the

log.

Medical staff send a report to VSP that shows the total number of gastrointestinal illness cases for both passengers and crew.

What is a reportable case of gastrointestinal illness?

VSP defines gastrointestinal illness as three or more loose stools within a 24-hour time period or what is more than normal
for that person, OR vomiting along with one of the following symptoms:

e diarrhea, or

e muscle ache, or

e headache, or

¢ abdominal cramp, or

e fever.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/about_gi_surveillance.html



Page 371: 5/11/24, 2:26 PM VSP Gastrointestinal Illness Surveillance | VSP | CDC

When do ships report gastrointestinal illnesses to VSP?

Cruise ship medical staff are required to send gastrointestinal illness case reports to VSP at these specific times:

Twenty-four to thirty-six hours before arriving to a U.S. port from a foreign port. This initial report is required even when
there are no cases of gastrointestinal illness.

If the number of ill passengers or crew changes after the initial report, but before the ship is 4 hours from arrival.

When 2% or more of the passengers or crew are ill. This report must be sent any time the vessel is in the United States or
within 15 days of arrival at a U.S. port.

When 3% or more of the passengers or crew are ill. This report must be sent any time the vessel is in the United States or
within 15 days of arrival at a U.S. port.

When unusual illness symptoms are reported to the ship's medical staff. Unusual gastrointestinal symptoms include
relatively high incidences of illnesses in successive cruises, unusual severity of illnesses or complications, high numbers
of persons reporting illnesses over a brief period, and suspicion of an uncommon causative agent.

What does VSP do with surveillance reports?

We monitor and evaluate reports of gastrointestinal illness aboard ships to

Determine if a high number of people are sick.
Find out if unusual cases occur.
Provide support to the cruise line and cruise ship crew as they respond to an increase in cases.

Analyze illness patterns over time.

VSP provides support and technical assistance when

the number of ill passengers or crew members reaches 2% or more of the total number of passengers or crew members
or

an unusual gastrointestinal illness pattern or characteristic is found.

Learn what VSP does in an outbreak.

How can | protect myself from gastrointestinal illness?

Use proper handwashing techniques throughout your voyage, but especially after using the bathroom and before eating.
Avoid any food or water that you think may be contaminated.
Avoid raw or undercooked shellfish.

Avoid unnecessary direct hand contact with surfaces likely to be contaminated and items a lot of people touch such as
elevator buttons or public toilet room door handles.

Avoid unnecessary close contact with ill persons.

See our tips for healthy cruising.

What are common types of gastrointestinal illnesses?

Noroviruses
© Facts about noroviruses on cruise ships

o Norovirus
Escherichia coli

Salmonella

Last Reviewed: January 5, 2023

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/vsp/desc/about_gi_surveillance.html

2/2



Page 372: 5/11/24, 4:37 PM Water Management Gaps and Legionnaires’ Disease Outbreaks | Safe Water | EHS | CDC

aay Centers for Disease —
Control and Prevention

Water Management Gaps and Legionnaires’ Disease
Outbreaks

Findings from a review of CDC-led Legionnaires’ disease outbreak investigations, 2015-2019

Take steps to improve water management in buildings and prevent outbreaks of Legionnaires’ disease (LD).

e Building managers can increase use of programs that identify areas or devices in a building where Legionella might

grow or spread to people (water management programs, or WMPs). We found that all deficiencies associated with LD
outbreaks could have been prevented through effective use of such programs.

e Environmental health staff can collect and share data on common environmental and WMP deficiencies. This type of
information sharing can improve WMP implementation.

Comprehensive water management programs can prevent problems associated with outbreaks.

We analyzed reports from CDC-led investigations of LD outbreaks to find deficiencies associated with outbreaks. We
examined each deficiency by several criteria, including type of WMP deficiency and type of environmental deficiency
(process, equipment, or human error or from unmanaged external change).

All of the deficiencies associated with outbreaks could have been prevented by comprehensive, properly implemented
WMPs.

e The most common WMP deficiencies were that a building lacked a WMP (43%) or the WMP would have been adequate
but was not followed (implementation deficiency, 40%). An example of an implementation deficiency would be not
measuring water heater temperatures as called for in the WMP.

e Most environmental deficiencies (82%) were associated with a missing process or a process that could not prevent
growth or spread of Legionella (process failure). The others were caused by human error or equipment failure.

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/legionella/water-mgt-gaps-Id-outbreaks.html

1/2



Page 373: 5/11/24, 4:37 PM Water Management Gaps and Legionnaires’ Disease Outbreaks | Safe Water | EHS | CDC

Most WMP deficiencies associated Most environmental deficiencies were
with outbreaks were due to missing due to process failure.

or improperly implemented WMPs. Equipment

failure, 4%*

wmpP
content
deficiency,
17%

Human
error, 15%
Process
failure, 82%

WMP
implementation
deficiency,

40%

EH practitioners play an important role in investigating and preventing LD outbreaks.

Information gathered by EH practitioners during LD outbreak investigations describes water system management
practices and maintenance deficiencies.

We created a method that EH practitioners can use to collect this type of information to help address gaps and target
water management priorities. EH practitioners, building managers, and other public health staff can share and use this
information to identify common causes of LD outbreaks and improve the use and content of WMPs.

e Read the scientific article [4 this summary is based on (includes abstraction method)

e Explore CDC's Toolkit on Developing a Water Management Program to Reduce Legionella Growth and Spread in
Buildings

e Discover CDC's new Toolkit for Controlling Legionella in Common Sources of Exposure

e Take Preventing Legionnaires’ Disease: A Training on Legionella Water Management Programs (PreventLD Training)

e Find more Legionnaires’ Disease Resources for Environmental Health Professionals

* Note: Percentages do not add to 100 due to rounding.

Page last reviewed: April 18, 2022

https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/water/legionella/water-mgt-gaps-Id-outbreaks.html

2/2



Page 374: 5/11/24, 2:14 PM Wildfires | CDC

Climate change is increasing the vulnerability of many forests to wildfires and is also projected to increase the frequency of
wildfires in certain regions of the United States. Long periods of record high temperatures are associated with droughts that
contribute to dry conditions and drive wildfires in some areas. Wildfire smoke contains particulate matter, carbon monoxide,
nitrogen oxides, and various volatile organic compounds (which are ozone precursors) and can significantly reduce air quality,
both locally and in areas downwind of fires.

Smoke exposure increases respiratory and cardiovascular hospitalizations; emergency department visits; medication
dispensations for asthma, bronchitis, chest pain, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (commonly known by its acronym,
COPD), and respiratory infections; and medical visits for lung illnesses. It has also been associated with hundreds of
thousands of deaths annually, based on an assessment of the global health risks from landscape fire smoke. Climate change
is projected to increase wildfire risks and associated emissions, with harmful impacts on health.

CDC Wildfire Resources:

e Wildfires - prepare for a wildfire, stay safe during a wildfire, and protect your health when you return home after a
wildfire

e Wildfire Smoke and Air Quality - resources to protect yourself from wildfire smoke, particularly for people with
respiratory or cardiovascular illnesses, and children, pregnant women, and responders

e NIOSH Fighting Wildfires - resources for wildland firefighters, fire departments, and partner organizations
Page last reviewed: June 18, 2020

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/wildfires.htm



Page 375: we ; }
i ‘) rf
rey 1
4 ae
7 .
% a i
hy é
om,
=
a=
|
|
fm)

=)

2)
: |
* I

QBINENT Of

¢

ri
i ,

Be,
San peve™



Page 376: Suggested citation: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development. Healthy housing reference manual. Atlanta:
US Department of Health and Human Services; 2006.

Use of trade names is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Public Health Service,
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Cover: Large photo by Teresa M. Sims; small photo by Don W. Johnson.

Additional copies of this manual can be downloaded from
www.cdc.gov/healthyhomes/publications.html



Page 377: Preface..c.ccccccsscssesceccsecsesscscesessesscsecsesecsessessesseseesesscsscsesacsessessesscsesesscsscsesaesessessessessesessesscsecsesecsecsecsesecsecaeaesecsteaesesaeeatenes 1

Acknowledgments ....
Abbreviations and Acronyms

Defimitions .0....cscececesecsesesesscsesesesscsesesscscscseseacsesneacacssseseacsuescscessusseaeesessscscssescacsnsncscscsnensacaesesscacsesssacacsusseacassneseatenseeseaes 7
Standards and Organizations svsvsiscsvsssoevssscsvesvssveveecsivsvsswersovssvvevavevsusesovcensivevsqsssvecsen seauravsevvevanveveevorsevenvanstuetsnesevsesetss 11
Executive SUMMary...c.ccccecsesesessescsessescscsecsesescsesscseseeesscsessescsesseecscseeessscseescsesseesscseeseesaeseeecsesesseessseeeeeseseeeesseeaeeeaees 15

Chapter 1: Housing History and PUrpOse............ccccccssscccssssccccssssccccscccscsssccsscssccccesscscees LL
Tntroduction......cccccccescessesscescesececcescesscsseescesscsscsscsecescssesscssseasesseesscsecsssesscsscessessessessecaeceacasesseeaseacesseesecaesessessessensenses

Preurban Housing....

Ephemeral Dwellings sisvsssenessssreraunamenicennnewrenancanensennnmmunenrnnreniremmmnanveanmnraanemeraeres 1-1
Episodic Dwellings .......c.ccccccesessesesessesesesessesesessescscscsneseseseseseecsuesesescsecaeacsesscaesnsscacacsueseacansneacacsesneaeenseseasenseeseanes 1-1
Periodio: Dwelling sisssscsissmessrenesnerraunamenicenneurenancanen senna smnienmrnne men mee 1-1
Seasonal Dwellings .......c.ccccecesessesesesseseseseesesescssesescscsseaeseseseseecsnesesnecsusacsceesscaesnsnsacacsusscacansneacacsesesseatseneaeenseeneaes 1-2
Semipermanent Dwellingsesscsvssssrersusmesscenevewrenscanenseennnaunenranravenremmmnanveanmraaneer eres 1-2
Permanent Dwellings ..........c.cesessesesesseseseseesesesessesesesssesescsneseseecsucseseecsecaescsssscacsnsucacacsusscacansneacacsesesasetssseaeenseeseaes 1-2
Urbanization ...c.cccccccccsccscscescssesscscescsccsecsesscsscsessesscsssessssesaessesseacssessssessessesessesaesscsesaessesecsesaesecsesaesacssesesaesacsecaeseeaeeateass 1-2
Trends in Housing........c.cscesessssssessesesesesscsessscsesescsscseseesscscssscacsesseseacssecacscsnsscaeecsucscanenescsesnsecacaesueasatsesneasasseneateneeeaea 1-3
References ....cccsccsssccsscseescscesesscsscsecscsessecsesscsscsessesscsessessssecaessesssaessesscsesasusesessesaesscsessesscsecsesacsecsecaeseesecseeaesecsecseeeeaeeaeeaes 1-7
Additional Sources of Information ...c..ccccccesssesseseseseseseseseeeeseseseecsesessecescucsseaeseneesesesesaeseseeceasaeseeseaeeeseaeseneeaeaeeeeeeaeeees 1-7

Chapter 2: Basic Principles of Healthy HOUSING ............ccccssccccsssscccscsccccsssccccssscccsssscses 21
Introduction sissssissescsvsenncnsnsremenns vrenencannnnremenns renner memes remem a areeneereeemneneemereereeeeINN RN IEREESS
Fundamental Physiologic Needs
Fundamental Psychologic Needs
Protection Against Disease ........cccccsscessseseseseseseneseneeeeseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseneseneaesenenees
Protection-Apainst Injury sccossssssecessseamannmmnscenursrysroammnresnirernarenmeenmn amma rmm nT Neer TENNITO ETNA TINES
Protection Against Fire ........ccccssessssseseseseseseseeseeeseseneseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseneseseseneseseseseseseseseseseseseneseseaesenenees
Fire Extinguishers ssssscsssmessrenessserraunamenscennvenrenancanen sername ranrevenremmmnan ven mnraaneer eT
Protection Against Toxic Gases ........ssssccesesssssssssesssssesseseeesesesesesesesesesesesesesesesesessscseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseieseseasscesices
References ccsissssisaesrsverwansnvremenns vreneuanannrmenns veenennmn nares remem areensereemnmeenremeree rem INNNEREESS

Additional Sources of Information .

Chapter 3: Housing RegulationSsscscscscssssscassercccsassscevccssccevavsiensacssesevssassesessosssesscerecesseae S71

Tntroduction......cccccccscsssscscescssesscscescscesecsesscsscsessesscsecsessesesaessesseaeusesscsecaeusesessesaesscsecaesacsecsesaesecsecaesacsecseesesecsecaeseeaesateaes 3-1

History

Zoning, Housing Codes, and Building Codes ..c.ssssssssssessversevassesvaveresresvovseccavevsusssveccsnsvsuravvetesvssveenevevsevennavsaveeveevevsesees 3-2
Zoning and Zoning Ordimances ........sccecssessssesessesesesessesesesessesescssesesescsssescsesscaesescscsesesseaeansveacaeseseeseetseeneaeenseneanes 3-3
Exceptions to the: Zoning Code sccssssvssserssvesssisscavsssvevsxsscsavsvssvavesvsssaeveceotovvsvessscsevesvoovanvovaanstvavcevenssenwaveanereunssveeess 3-5
Housing Codes
Building Codes

References .....scescssssssesessecesesessesesescsccsesesessssesesesseseecsassesescessaesssscseseessassesssesenesesaescuesaeacuceeeaeseeseaeseseeseseaeeseaeeneeseaeeeeees

Additional Sources of Information ....c..ccccccccsscsessssscssesesscscesesesecsevscsecsecsesscsessesscsecsecseseesecaeseesscaesessesecaeeaesecateaeeseneeas 3-12

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Contents iii



Page 378: Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests...........cccccsssccccsssccccssscccccsscccccessccscsssccsccssccccessccsees 421
Tintroduction....c.ccccccsccssescsceseesesscseescsecsecsesscseesessesscsesessesecsesacsscsessesacsessesscsessesaesscaesaesassecsesassecaesaeseeseeseeaesecseeaeeeaesateaes

Disease Vectors and Pests ..

Fite ANG wncmnnnecasmcnnacnnenemeaneun mame eran enone
Mosquitoes
References sessccesesnasenwemaecesiwescrnswamsnnenaianrasmnves sear avanwewiin win ar aveneeneaemsnnrananerastnietess

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials..
Introduction
Indoor Air Pollution wissssssesciwescenssamsenxeascisieancrasmnessaeevavaasnnieeiniaravanenansaminiararannnncnrnnntiain 5-1
Biologic Pollutant .......c.ccscesesesssseseseesesesesscsesessesescsssesescseseseensucseaescsucseansvescacsesscacansesscacssueacasssnsacansneneatenseeseases 5-1
Chemical Pollutants vesccsesscsecrsscasenwessnsraavanenanie wesaracanwnncacnennisioanmnreanmeninannunneninnais 5-6
Toxic Materials

ALSChlOsenmmnnconnmnnnmnm nnn enema en enn een

References ...cccccscssessessesesscseeseescsessessessesesscsscsecsesscsessesaesessesscsucsecsessesessessssasseaesacsecaecaeseesecaeseeseesecaesacsecaeacsecaeeaeeeeaeeas

Chapter 6: HOUSING StrUCtures cissscasscsssacscscscsscccccascacsscssccseessseaveasssevsassaasecsasssesasssevecscre O-1
Introd UCti Otis scsrcssssreenrounsreernaroneeaneannmeresnnmaieseseeanneeymaren mT NREreTaN Maen eREreaT ERR ITeNNTNCRCET

Foundation ...
Vapor Barriers
Crawl Space Vapor Barriers ........ccccsssssssessssssssessesesesessescscseescseensucscsesessesesnessscacsesscacanssscacssueseassesesasansueneatenseeseases 6-9
Vapor Barriers for Concrete Slab\ Homes sisevsesssanasnanessvencenemmomnaensseunerremanmananemmrensrmmnannieereenees 6-9
Wall and Ceiling Vapor Barriers 0.0... ccsssssessssesesessesesesesscsescsesesesessesescecescsescescacacssscacsesssseasssssseacsusseaeeneneseaeenees 6-9
House Framing svcsrecseesarnvreennessnmmarnnnernnmamnnrenesanmaren sum mmrnETE RANI
Foundation Sills ...c..cccccccccssesssscssescsscccsscsesscscescsesecsesesscsessessesscsesscsecsecsesecsecsesesscseesesassecsecaeseesecaecsesecseeaeaeaneaes
Flooring Systems...

Stairway woeceeeeceeccsscsessseesesesesseesseseescsesessescsesessesesceececsesaeecseseseeecseseessaeseeseasacsesscsesdeesaeseessasseeeeecssseeeeasaeseseeaseeeesaeas
Wind OWS semen emnaceunnerneeeearrennen acme nara enue wae remem

Roof Pramitig vessscssmmeenscsssemasrarmnanunuenenneneernrn wenn ermn ETERNAL ENE NANA RITNTEES
Rafters... /
Collar Beatn secssssnssecessseveceranvavnnwessnnawavancnnnse casavarawasainieieaien err eran ue tnuene eet
Purlit..cccccccccsccscscesscscesceesesscscssesesscsecssssesscsesscsscsecsesscsscsesaesacssesessesecsecseseesecsesaesscssesesacsecsecaeseesecsecsesecseeseeaeaeeaes

iv Contents Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 379: Roof Sheathing.......cccecsssseseseesesesesssscsesesscsesesesesesnssesescsessesescssseseecsesacscsesscsescsucscaesescassesssacsesesssaeesseaseaeensneaeas 6-15
DOtnel nanawunnancnmm nnn mn aw en enn neem 6-15
ROOFS. ...scescesesseseesescesecsessescescssesecseescsecsesssssessesessesscsesesscsesaessesscsesacsacsecsessesscsescaesscseseesesecsecaesacsecaeeassecseesesucaecaeeaeseeases 6-15
Asphalt: Shing Css: ssswcanssmereunnennrenermmnennensennemnarmremauinuree nm EERE NAIR 6-15
EPDM. ou eecececcccessesssesssecesceescecnseecsuecnscecsaecnaeessneceaeeceeceaeecsueceaeecaeceaeesaeceseeeseceaeesueceaeecaeseseeceeeceaeecneeceeeseeeseaeees 6-15
Asphalt Built-up Roofs sesewseuvessenssescnmamnenessenernarmeremnuinunenn mRNA NANI: 6-15
Coal Tar Pitch Built-up Roofs ......c.ccecsessssssesessesesesessesesesessesescsecseseecencsesesesscscscevescaeseescasscseacassesseaeessesseaeensneneas 6-15
Slate Roof S sesuscesssesecsvisrennennisssseesrrsreaeenmmrereniweacrnsiamnnnensenaiianirasm mee aumaTaanenTuie munaraniRaes 6-15
Tile Roofs...ccccccsccscsscssescsscsceseesessesessescsecseesesecsessesscseseesesscsesacssesesasssesecseesesscsecsesacsessesaesscseeaeassacsecseseeaesaeeaeeeatens 6-15
Coppet Roof wressssenenmamemenessrnanenmnrennaimnee naman on mnanmamas Enea R ERIN 6-15
Galvanized Iron Roofs .....cccscsssssssseseesscesscsessescescesesscseeacsscsessesacseesessesecsesseeecsecsesaeseeseeseeaesecsecsessesecaeeaeseesseseeaeseeaes 6-15
Wood Shingle Roofs 5
Roof Flashing ......c.c.csecesssseseseseescsesesscscscsssscsesessesescsnssesescssscsescsesseaeeceucaescssscacscsucacansescassesesasacsesssacatanseeseensneneas 5
Gutters and Leaders 6
Exterior Walls and Trim...c..cccccccsccsssscsscscescssescesesscsscsesscsecsessesscsesscsacsecsesscsscsessesecseeseesesecsecsesacsecseaesecaeeseeesecaeeeeseeates 6
Putting It All Together... 6-16
References .....secesssseseseseeseeeseeeeees 6-21

Vitty! cssssnssvenmerenasnanmrennncenammnamarenan cream creer aera 7-4
ASDEStOS ...csccscsscsessescesesseseesesesscsecscsscsscacsssssesessesacsesaessessesessessesecsesacsecsesaesscsesaessssecsecseseesecsesaesesaecseeassecateaeeesaeeasenes 7-5
Metal seccrcssveasnscesesreseesvasranueeniesssseeseseaernnmmancenweacen siren anrasmnne numa avannnnma marae: 7-5
References .....ccesessssesesessesesesesseseseseecesesessesesesesesseseuessesssesesseseessassssssasacacseeseseeesaeacacseeseseucacseneeseaeaeaeaeseeeeseaeeeeeaeeeeeeaeaes 7-5
Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues..............sscccccsssscccssssscccsssseeees On 1
Introdicti ottscasensescsusrsavanenanse cusaracanwnnncacnsntisioannnneasaueeinaeanar een eats aeRO 8-1
Water SOUrces...ccccscessescecssesseesecescescseeaeesesesseeseseseeacaesesseeassecsecaesaeseeaeeaseacaeeseecenesaeeseesaeeaeeaeaeeaeeaeeesaesseeeeaeeaeeasersaeeaeees 8-1
Source LOcattOtynssecsssvssvsrvevessveucavssosswucesscexeuny ex eaua seus seine syeaeUse NUR USaN SUUE OSES UTE NTR NERUD SEORNO TESST PRATER UOT TLAG OSE RNARUSETE 8-2
Well Construction ...cccccccccccsssscssescesesscseesesscsecsesscsseseacsecsecsesecsesaessssecsessesscsecsesacsesaesaesecsesaesacsecsesacsecsescaeacseeseeaeeasaeeaeees 8-3
Sanitary Design and Constructiony sweascseeuessnnesenmamnn omen anmannansinaemraanemne REINS 8-4
Pump Selection ......ecececssseseseseesesesesseseseseescsesesvescsesesnesesesessesescsecseseecsecaesesescscseeneacaesuescacansssasassesesasenseseeaeenseeseaees 8-4
Dupand Drilled Wells viessssssmssnsensssanermamnraannsmeenenmann nner are 8-4
SPHings ..esceeeecesseeeeseeeeessseeseseeeeseeeeeseseessesesesssesessseseseseseseseseseseeesessseseseeesesesessscecsssesesescecsescscesscecsesseeseseecseacacetiees 8-6
GISCORIS weeps eeeavsceussvuevesvexvurvencauaecus wees eee suae nee Nes Gy SORES TE OS TSPN NTIS UO LUONNOIT GUEST AVN UES GS AUOTR SRE OSEUS US ENTEN VSS U NR ERT TOOTSIE 8-6
Disinfection of Water Supplies... cccesesssssessssesesessesesesesscseecsussesescenssescensecacsnsucscsesesscacsesssscacsnsseseassuaseaeensusscaseeseeaes 8-7
Chlorine Garrier Solutions secsssssssesesnsevnvmmancesciwescensirmnenennienanrasmnvnennmavavanwwmn monn: 8-9
Routine Water Chlorination (Simple) ........ccceseeceesesseseseseseseseseesesescescseseeesscseseeseacsesescacsesssseassesssscetseeeeaeensneseaes 8-9

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Contents v



Page 380: Well Water Shock Chlorination
Backflow, Back-siphonage, and Other Water Quality Problems
Backflow
Back-Siphonage xe
Other Water Quality Problems... cceccecsssesssesessseseseseseseseseeeseseseseseecsesesescscenseseacseseeceesceeeeaceseeeeeseeseeneseneneneeenaes
Protecting the Groundwater Supply

References
Additional Sources of Information ssisavecwsssssessessaevnwmmeescieeacenswimsennnnimaanmnesnvaraarnnmnnneet

Chapter 9: PUMDING sescsscinssaneseuinssessuiss Sass ceuentecminnpesinnesstalecasaneeaVeaises bai sssentasuntiesteO =

Tmtroduction.....ccceccsesssssseseseesesesescecescsescesesesessssescsesseseseseesesceceaesesesasacsesesaesenesseasuesesaeseaeeaeaeseeseseaeeeeseaeeeeseaeeeeeaeeeeeeasaes

Elements of a Plumbing System
Water Service
Hot:and:Gold Water Main Lines sasesscsssusrsecavanenanse casaraenmwnnnceacnstsivannnresniensnamnunuaeniunnais 9-4
‘Water Heaters

Drainage System
Corrosion Control.....ccccccsssssssssesessesesesescesesesessesesesescesescsesseseeescaeseessassesessesesesseaesesesaesesesaeseaeeceasaeseaeaeaeeeeaeaeeeeseateeess

Water Conservation

Putting It All Together

References

Additional Sources of Information .....

Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment ..........c.ccccccccssssccccsssccccscscccsessscccsesscccesseees LO-1
Introduction

Treatment of Human Waste

On-site Wastewater Treatment SyStenns wens ssseecerarmnmmneneranenr nanan emrenmanmnennanranmaeRE 10-3

Septic Tank Systems

Alternative Septic Tank Systems
Maintaining On-site Wastewater Treatment Systems

Symptoms of Septic System Problems .
Septic Tank Inspection
References
Additional Sources of Information ..

Chapter 11: ElQCtri City sicsssssecscccascsssvsacarsonssessccaxeascicsssasesseenstaveasssensanaanemmcemmecaccs 11-1
Introduction

Flow of Electric Current

Electri¢e Service Enttanee sisvesciwescrssvesvsencessaceurasevanceaswenvecssacacevaaverawu wees weusisre ae araeunaaes qe ceeseeav asta wrnnniseastentetiess 11-3

Service Drop
Underground Service...

Electric Meter...
Grounding ......
Two- or Three-wire Electric Services
Residential Wiring Adequacy
Wire Sizes and Types

vi Contents Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 381: Reducing Risk ...c.ccceeecesesscsssesessssesesesesesesscseseseassesessesesesessesescsessesesceussesnsesucscscsneacansesscassessacacsesssacassesseseensneneas 11-7
Wit SiZe8 sweseusevseseusverveqevseusavincusswuceessexeeny eeeana seus sBUeReS UAT SUST RNAS USES SUORN OST CLSIT EA LANEN IG SUONOTES SER ITER E NON STE TREES

Wire Types ....cccccccescsssescscsescscscsescsescscsescsesesesesescsesescsesescsesesesessscseacscsesesesesesesesesesesescseseacseseseseseaeseseseseasacsescseseacas
Types’of Cab leiwsessevsssssaexenmarannnnsmermcnmnn marr anmanunanman an eEM RANTES
Flexible Cords...

The Problem

The Standards

Safety Suggestions
WTI occ eecccseseseseseeeesesesecsesesessessscescacseseescacsessssesenscaesesenscasseseescssseescaeseseeseseaeseesesenecseseneeecssseescseseseescseneeeseseneeseaes

Open Wiring 1-10

Concealed Knob and Tube Wiring ......c.cccceessesesesessesesesessesesescscseecescscsesesscseseensscsesescacsnsnsseacsesesaeenseseaeenenees 1-10
Electric Service Panel 11-10
Over-current Devices 1-10

Cireuit Breakers: (Fuseless Service Panels) scsssssesciwescrssseansvnossscenresrranirasmucessusiaianvanenwiae cusaraawns 1-11

Ground Fault Circuit Interrupters .......cccccssesesessesseseeseeseseeseseseescsneseesescesssnsseessseseeseseesseusseeassnsseesseeeseeecseensaes 1-11

Are-fault Circuit Interrupters sssscnssescnmammenessrneanarmnrnnuineren mammaire 1-11

Fused Ampere Service Panel (Fuse Box)......c.csssssssssssessesesssessesesesecseseecescsesesesacseseessscsesescacsesseaeacsesesasenseseseensnees 1-12
Electric: Citetlits eaves sisrsravaanancecnssrannnwnnneacnssieneannanen neni nannnnenunnnwine a eNNRTASIR 1-13

Outlet Switches and Junction Boxes . -11-13

Grounding Outlets wscscasaseeesssnanermreunnnineen mmm omnes NaN 1-13

Polarized Plugs and Connectors.......secscesessssesessesesesessesesesesscsescsecseseecescscsesecseseseesesesesvescacsesssseassesssaeenssseseenenees 1-14
Gommon Electrical Violations sess snsecsvossnwenseacnsesnoanmnreenensnannmnnennnaiannenannanTasneN 1-14

Excessive or Faulty Fusing ......ccccssssscsesessssssesessesssesessesesesessesescsecscseecsecscsesesscseseessscsnsescacsesssaeacsesesacanseeseseensnees 1-15

Cords Run Through Walls or Doorways and Hanging Cords or Wires ........cccssesesseseseesesesessesesesesseseetsnsneseenenees 1-15

Temporary Wiring.....c.cccccccessscsesescsesescsesescsescsesesesesesesesesesesesesesesesesesesesesesesescseseseseseseeeseseseseseseseseeeseeesessseeeseets 1-15

Excessively Long Extension Cords. 1-15

Dead or Dummy Outlets .......ccceecsesesesescsesesesesesessesesesesscsescsucsescsceecacsescscsesnensacsesnessacsesesseacsesnsaeansesseseenenees 1-15

Aluminum, Wiring Insidethe Home sescsssssevensssvoncanermnreunnimnnerenaamnninenemnarmnrnnaninean mann 1-15
Inspection Steps ......ccccesesesesesesssesesesesesesesesesesesssesesesescsesessseseseseseseseseseseseesseseseseseseseseseseseesseseeeseseseseseesseseesseaeeeaeaes 1-15
References vcicasensesisiaravaacnanse sassvarnwnnsacisisienioanmanen neni nannnnenunnn Tinea NRTA SI 1-16
Additional Sources of Information ....c.ccccccccsscsssssssesseseescseesesesecsecsesecsecsesecsssessesecsecseseesecatcaesscaessesacaecaeeacseeaeeaeneats 1-16

Introduction

Heating
Standard Putels secs ssesecsvisrenneeniwesseeesersraernmmrereniweacrasiamnnnesenasianirasmmne annawavranenwuse maracas 12-4
Central Heating Units... ccccccessssesssesssscsssessesssesessesesssessesescsecseseecsecacscsesscsescsncscsesescassessacacsesesacasssesaeensneneas 12-7
Space Heaters wscicscssssesnsasnneensmvneinramnncenmunensnranunnmunensnrannnenmuneninrannenmuneninnnT 12-12
Hydronic Systems ......c.cessscsesesessesesesseseseseescsesesvescsesessesesssssesescsecseseecsucacsesucscsesesssscansvescacsesesseacsesesacenseseeaeensnees 12-14
Direct Vent Wall Purtiaces scssvscsscssecsseaeenunnesciwescrsuansnnenseuresianirasmen ananassae 12-14

Cooling 12-14
Air Conditioning ssswcangsmerunenemrencnmammenensrnananmrnumn ain ann neEaRRNERNTENEE RINE 12-14
Circulation Fans ...cc.ccccccscsscssesssscsscseescssesscscsscseeseesesecsecsesscsessesaesecsessessesecaeeacsessessesacsecseesesacsecsesscsecaecseeeeseeaeeasaees 12-16
Evaporation Cooletssescoswssesesssseneanenmnreunnuinuneremamn camnnmaemarnmans nae raa RE ENN 12-16

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Contents vii



Page 382: Fireplaces....c.c.csscseesessesesesessesessescscsesscsescsssscaesesvsscaesnsseseaessscseansusscarsnsucacasssecscsesusacacsaucacacsnaacassseneacateeeeaeaneeees
References svessccvsesnssenwnmecessiwescessiamnnnensenasvanirasmmves aaa avaneewiie miniairariamniaen einer

Additional Sources of Information .....

Chapter 13: Energy EtRCIONCY sissssasscsssccscscscsscccccascacsscssccseessseaveasssensassaasecsasssesssssevecss 13-1

Introduction ss cissssssimuecesiweacensuamennenserananrasmnves amar avaarewiie mina avannaneacnsmararnnNets 13-1
Energy Systems .......ccccesssesesssesesssesssssesesssesessecseseesseeseesseeesseesseeseesseeeeeeeeeseeeseseeeeeeseseeeseseeeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 13-1
Reval tes seaesesscsesersreaevnmeeressiweacessreamnenenscenanwanirasmven anwar avnaweniie mina av nenanen cnemiarannnrnententetass 13-1
ROOfS..ccecesesesssseseseseeseseseececesescsesseseusssesescesssesenssaesesesssesesesseseusacseseessasseussesesesseseseuessessaeeeseseeseacaeseeseseaeeeeaeeeneeseaseeeess 13-2
Ridge! Vetits bxcenesmnsnaserssievsssnermanreneresmanrensr manner em Rm marr NNER RNIN CENRTENES 13-2
Fan-powered Attic Ventilation.. . 13-3
White Roof Surhice sisi sseracsnwnnnceavnsnssioanmnrennnnnannnnnnennnannne snare 13-3
Insulation .....ccccccccccsscscesescescesesscseescsccsecsssscssescsscsscsescsecsessessesscsessesacsscsesacsscsesaesscseeaesassecsessesacsesateaesecaesesaesecaeeaeaesates 13-3
Wall Insulation evasesevsecnseracsnwnnccavnsninieanmnresnnnrnsnnnnnarennnannneennranrarnena 13-4
Floor Insulation ....c..ccccccscssssesssscsscsesscsccssesesscscescsscsessesscsscsesaessesscsesscsscsecsesscsecsesaesscseaesacsecaecseseesecaecseseeseeaeeaeseenee 13-4
DO008 ccescnsececxeeaceapeeieisee AK EEA OIE AT RELA EA EAA AEE 13-5
Hot Water Systems ....ccccecescesssescesesssessesesesesecscscsecseseseeesseseeseecseeeessesessesesseessesesseesesseeesasseseeesasseeeeasaeeeseeaseaeeeaeas 13-6
Windows.......cccccecee .13-7
Caulking and Weather-Stripping ........c.cccssscssessesesesessesesesseseseensecsesescescsesssssscscscssescanssscacsnsneseassesseacatsaneasenseeneas 13-7
Replacing Window Frames? ssscswssnsecsneesmanensrmnnnnieermnsmmennan emer armanmnnmmnane rN CENTTENES 13-7
Tinted Windows ...cccccccccssscsessesseseesessesseseesesecsecsesscssscesesecsessesssesaesscssesessesecsecstsassecsesaesecseeseeaesacaecaesesaeeaeeaeseeaeeas 13-7
Reducing Heat Loss and Condensation: sessssswesrmrmncemnenenmmmnessenemnarmnrnmnninneenmamnencsmnneres 13-7
Glazing... eeceesessesesesecsesesesesesesescscsesscscsesescacsessescacsssesescsnescseessusseaescencacasssscscsesscacanssscassesueacacsnsneacansuaneatenseaneas
LAYVSLD spesanernnamce comes ennnarnermensem ener RERT ERR RISCNRN EEL
Other Options ..
Solar Energy issesesscsomuensesssemacranmanmncnmacnanenn acre seTaRRNNRNN RTE MANNE OITNNEES
Active Solar Systems .....cccssssssssesssssessseseseseseeeseseeeseseseseseseeeseeeeusceesuseensnseensueeesseseessesesesuseenseeeeseeseaeesseeeenseesenaeeneees

Passive Solar Systems
Conducting an Energy Audit......c.ccccecesessesesessesesesesscsesesssesescsussesesssucsesescscsesnseeacsesesssassnseasassesesaeaeseassaeetseeseasenes 13-10
References

Additional Sources of Information ....c..ccccccccssesessssssssescsscseesessesecseescsecsecsesacseesesaesecsecaeseesscaeeaesecsecsessesecatsacseeaeeaeeaeaes 13-11

Childproofing o..c.ceeeecesesscsesesesesesessscsesesscscsnssescasscsseacsesuescacacsusscsesssucscanssecsesnseescacsesucacsesuescaesesseseassesseasesseeseaeeneees
Havard sevvssssvcvcevszessvceusvauxexessuwcacevesvwswosevsvessaseusaetwousi wes suwecese ates eeu Ves NU WSS USNR AS RR RERE SUR ICSU RT SETI NRE
Public Health Issues .....c.ccssesssesssseseseseeceseseseseseseeescesesescesesceeesesescessassesessesesesssaeseuesaeaeeesesaeseeceaeaeseeseseeeeeaeeneeseaseees
DISC8868 sr ccrmncnnnenmmnmncnnnm enn nn ee
[injuries ......cececcecccsceseseseescseseesescseseescsesescesesenecsescsesecsesessescsesesscssseseesssensesesesenscsesensesssesenseseaeeeesesenecaesssensesenseeeeesees

Water Testing Equipment..

viii Contents Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 383: Disinfection ...c.cccccccccsscscssescescsscseescsccsecscesesseseesesscsecsessesessessesscsesacsacsecsesscsscsecaesecsesscesesecsecaesacsesaeeaesecaeeaeseesecaeeasseeaees 14-4

Content Turnover Rate vsessvesssveeewuesessvnezsavencesyexeeuse eas svuews sues re aeeaeeees SeOHtOT ESS PALIT EN I SLOT TEAG TER AT USES NENT ERIS 14-4
Filters ...c.ccccscsscscssessesecsesscscescescsecsescsecsecscssesseseusesscsesscsecsesaessesscsesacsacsecsesacsecsecassscseseeaesecsecsesacsesaeeassecsesaeeuesecaeeaeseeaees 14-4
High-rate Sand Filtets csssseessssremcanermnreunnucnnseemaman omen mamas arena REINS 14-4
Cartridge Filters ........
Diatomaceous Earth
Filter Loading Rates
Disinfectants acesssssrravancnnnsecnssraranwnnccacnsnnioannnresnaenrnannunnneniuninsanieaeNnaaTARR
Effect Of PH weesceceesesseeseseeseseseescscsessescscsesscsesesnesescsssesescsssesescsecseseeceecacscsesssacecsusacacsancasscsvsacacessssscansnaseaeensneaeas
Pool Water Hardness and Alkalinity: ssssssvesenanaasresmenenermanannnenieemenmmnaremessaneranmanunenmernarm eS 14-8
Liquid Chemical Feeders .......c.cscccsessssssesessesssessesssesessescsessscseecsuescsesceucsesceneecacansecscsesesnsacaeseescacssseseassaseaeetseseaeanenes 14-8

Positive Displacement Pump ..

Erosion and Flow-through Disinfectant Feeders .........cesecssessssesesesseseecsessesesesscsesesescseseescacsesescacsesssaeensesssaeensneneas 14-8
Spastand Hot Tubs swsssssesrsvmamnmansssarermaarnarenneenen mene memes er mRUNNNRT ETRY 14-9
References

Additional Sources’ of Infortnation wwssssvscasnnnessussavanennnsecsaarawnnncacnenaioanmnneameninunnnNs 14-11

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Contents ix



Page 384: List of Figures

Chapter 1: Housing History and Purpose. ...........sccccccsscccssssccccsssccccscsccccccsscccssssccceesssceees LL
Figure 1.1. Conditions in the Tenements..............+ 1-3
.1-6

Figure 1.2. Levittown, New York........ccccessssecsssessesssseesesesesseseeseensseesessesessescesseucseesssueseessseesseucsesassneseessseesssnsseensaneneeees

Chapter 2: Basic Principles of Healthy HOUSING.............ccsscccccsssccccsssscccsssccccssssccesssesees 2-1
Figure 2.1, Girea 1890 Teebox ssscssssssisenesvesreensrarnesvoveees eve D5
Figure 2.2. Smoke Alarm Testing .......csccccsssssessesesseessseesesteseeseseeseessseesesueseesesscseensseseaneseesesueseessseseensseesseneseeasseeseenesees 2-8

Chapter 3: Housing Regulations ssisiscsssscccccccdsiscscesscccsvssccevcssscccesssseceacsccsersccessccscsscaedsces 3-1
Figure 3.1. Exampleofia Floor Area sscsssesssssessseoverses we 3-5
Figure 3.2. Example of an Angle of Light Obstruction .........ccscccsessssessssseseeseseeseesseeesesseseesesseseessseeseeneseeneeneseessseeseeneaees 3-5

Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests...........cccccssccccsssscccssssccccsssscccccscccsccescccscssccccssssscees 4-1

Figure 4.1. Field Identification of Domestic Rodents 4-2
Figure 4.2. Norway Rat ....ceccscssecsesesseeseseeesteseeneenes 4-2
Figure 4.3. Roof Rat...c.csccceseeees 42
Figure 4.4. Signs of Rodent Infestation.....c..scscsssesssssessesesesessesesesessescscscsescsesscsescssscacsesncacsnseescacsesneacassesseseenseseaeenees 4-3
Figure 4.5, Rodent Prevention sviscsvsscsisssssesesovssvesvavscvsvsvsscvsesacasvovvaversavessstvscavsssvevexsscseusvsstarvevsssstveteetovesvenseceives voor 4-4
Figure 4.6. Live Traps for Rats.....c.cccsssessesssseeseseseeseessseessseseeseseseessseesesueseesesucseenssesesueseesesueseeasseesesnsseessansseessseeseeneaees 4-4
Figure 4.7, Kill Traps:for Rats: sesicsvssvsssssssesesorsevesvavscvevsvescvsesarasvovvaversevssssivecavsssvevexsocseusvsstarvevssseveteetevesvesssceives voor ens 4-4
Figure 4.8. American, Oriental, German, and Brown-banded Cockroaches.......c.ccsssssesesseseseseesesssesseseseseeseseensesseaeenees 4-5
Figure 4.9, American Cockroaches, Various Stages and Ages «..ssvsiserssvesssisscavssssevessoreevsvsscovvevsssstveceetsvvevstssreavervoeveversers 4-5
Figure 4.10. Oriental Cockroaches, Various Stages and Ages .......ssssecesesessesesesssseseseescseseeseseseseescacsesseaeacsesseaeensesseaeenses 4-5
Figure 4.11. German Cockroaches, Various Stages and Agesic.ssvisecssvesssisscarssssevessorsevsvssvaveevsasstveceotovvevatssreavenvooeversens 4-5
Figure 4.12. Brown-banded Cockroaches, Various Stages and Ages .......scscssessssesesesseseseesesesesescscsesseacassesseseenssseaeenees 4-5
Figure 4.13. Wood: Cockroach, Adult Malle sscissessscanesrsieneverrenanvcamenvernnsinrauunnnnsnscencnenrenannmansemnnmareranens 4-5
Figure 4.14. Reported Human Plague Cases (1970-1997) w.essessesseseessessessessessesseasessesseesecsseseeseessesesseaeasaneesseseesseneess 4-6
Figure 4.15, Flea Life Cycle cscssessxsvssvessssvsevesorssvesvavscvessnescvsesarasvovvaversevansstvecavsssvevexsocseusvsstarvevsusstveteetovesvenseceiven voor evs 4-6
Figure 4.16. Housefly [Musca domestica] ...ccsscessssssssesssseesessesesesesesescseesescsesesescsesacacsesnsacacseascacsnansacacsseseaeansesseaeanses 4-7
Figure 4.17. Life Cycleiof the Bly ssssessssssenssvernnearennennverrnncmnrensnirramnmnnscenneurenanmensenmarraue 4-8
Figure 4.18. Termite Tube Extending from Ground to Wall .......ccccescesessesseseeseensseeseseseeseseseessseeseeeseesseneseeasseeseenesees 4-9
Figure 4.19. Termite Mud Shelter Tube Constructed Over a Brick Foundation ........cccccsssscssesseseeseeseseeseesseesesteseeneeeess 4-9
Figure 4.20a. Ant (Elbowed Antennae: Fore Wings Larger Than Hind; Constricted Waist)........c.ccssessesesseseeesesseeeeees 4-9
Figure 4.20b. Termite (Beaded. Antennae; All Wings Equal) ....ssvsssecssvesssssccavsssssvessovesvsvssvaveovsasstveceetsvevenssveavervoeeversens 4-9
Figure 4.21. Life Cycle of the Subterranean Termite ..........cccccsscssssessesseseeseseeseeseseeseseseessseeseessseescsueseesssessecusseensaneseess 4-10
Figure 4.22. Subterranean Termite Risk in the United States ...sissssscsvsssscavssvssververectsvesvsssevssvssvsvssversevarsveveveensnsevereeess 4-11
Figure 4.23. Typical Points of Attack by Termites in the Home .......c.scscesseseesesssseesesteseessseeseescseeseseseesseeeseensseeseaesess 4-12
Figure 4.24. Construction Techniques That Discourage Termite Attacks ........c.scsccssssesseseeseeteseesesseseereseeseeseseeneeneseeees 4-14

Figure 4.25. Fire Ants
Figure 4.26. Range Expansion of Red Imported Fire Ants [RIFAs] in the United States, 1918-1998.
Figure 4.27. Fire Ant Mound ......c.ccccssessessssessesesseessseesesseseesesscseesssesesuesessesucsesussecsesueseesssucseeusseeassuesecssseeseeusseensaeesees

x Contents Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 385: Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials............ccccssccccssssccsssssccccessccccsssseeees nL
Figure 5.1. Mold Growth in the Home ........cscessssssesessesessseseseecssssesescsseseseesescacsesecscsessencacsessscacsesseaeassaneaeesseaeaseneeenes 5-6

Figure 5.2. Home Carbon Monoxide Monitor........ 5-7
Figure 5.3. Environmental Tobacco Smoke and Children’s Exposure ......csccscssessssessecsesesseeseseesesneseeseseeseeneseeseseseeneseese 5-8
Figure 5.4. Wood Products Label svsivsssscsscsovsisssrensevssvovscesnssessversasserscsunsssons svaravansonsecnisacsnsrvareavanaxenseunnvsreavaeveeeustiens
Figure 5.5. EPA Map of Radon Zones

Figure 5.6. Radon Entry sccsisssnaversevsrscessnansnanarcscsunssosssravaninnsecnsscsanannviuanconssunnee ave nransneeerenarrneneuis

Figure 5.7. Home Radon Detectors ....

Figure 5.8. Radon-resistant Construction: siscsvsvssxiesscsinssssnssvsravarsoressnisecsnssriavarvevescsnssunnseeeavervevesnsreopetversevervirnncenates 5-11
Figure 5.9. Arsenic Label ......c.ccsceesseseeseeeees .

Chapter'6: HOUSING Structure ccissccsssssaswsscacscacscsssevecscceascnsascavesseesseaesessssecsssvaaserssevecsaceveO-1
Figure 6.1. Housing Structure Terminology, Typical House Being Built Today .........ccceseesesesessesesesesseseetseeseneeteeenes 6-1
Figure 6.2. Housing Structure and Terminology, Typical House Built Between 1950 and 1980 .....ccseseseseesseeeeeeeees 6-5
Figure:6.3..Foundationt esssssmsnawssanermarasnnmeenmmann meres are MRTER REINS 6-8
Figure 6.4. Foundation Cracks ....c.cccccecessssssssessssesesessesescsesscseecsscscseeceusseseesescacsesucscseseessacsessacassnssescassuaneaeetssacaseneeeaes 6-8
Figure:G.5.. Interior Staitway snssewsssenesnaarasnnsneenemmannneememmenaremeesmmarermanunnmRTT RES 6-11

Figure 6.6. Classifications of Windows ........

Figure 6.7. Three Dimensional View of a Window wsscsisssssusssvivarseresssisecsssssvevesvevesssesseensseesverveveavssvonstversevervaveavonseiss 6-12
Figure 6.8. Window Details ......c.cccccsessesseseessessseesssneseessseeseessseesssnsseeseseeseeusseeassuesessssecsesucseeassneseesssecsesecseeasseseensseeses 6-12
Figure6.9. Wall Framing scsssnsvenasncemnanencncnnemansmannnacenanamammancnnen amen 6-16
Chapter 72 Environmental Barriers cssssssissecesnisssussvassavsscansdecssinsessinvossacansesscenadssavavessaass 2 = 1
Figure 7.1. Sources of Moisture and Air Pollutants .........ccccccscessessssessesssseesesesseesssssseeneseeseessseesesneseeseseeseessseeseaneseeneseese 7-1
Figure 7.2. Blown Attic Insultation’ .ssesesvsisssnensevssvovscesnsscssversanseecsunsesonssvsravarsorgecniocsnsrvasevanexenseustesreavaevneeenstsens
Figure 7.3. Depth of Attic Insulation .

Figure’ 7.4.Attio ventilation sivssscavsensssessesounisnsnensesssvorscesnsseasversansevecsunnssons svar avansengecnisacsnsriareavannexsnssunnesreavae nee teNs
Figure 7.5. Brick Structural Defect .....c.sccccssscsssseesesesseseeseseessessseesssesessssecscenssuesssusseesssveseeussecseaneseeassueseeneaeeseaneseeseneess
Figure’7.6. Corrosion in Piping Resulting From Galvanic Response ...issssessseversesovenssvsvsnssesvovensesansnenstvsvosensavsvovvevavenes 7-5

Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues..............ccccccsssscccssssscccsssceeees On 1

Figure 8.1. U.S. Water Supply by Source ....c.ceescesesessesesesessesescssscsescsseseseenescacsnsecsesesesssacseseseacsnsssscatsaneaeasseseaseneeeaes 8-1
Figure’8.2. Cross: Section of a Driven Well sssissvssssssessssovscesnssessversassesscsinsssonssvaravarsersecnisocsnsrvarsavannexsnseuntesreavaevneeenstsens 8-3
Figure 8.3. Well Seal......ccseeeeeeeees .. 8-4
Figure’8:4.:Converted Dug Well ssseswssssanesenancasnesmenenenmanunnimemmn me nnrnrenar mmm 8-4
Figure 8.5. Recapped and Sealed Dug Well ........ccesesseesessesesessssesesessseseeesscscsnseescsesssssacsessscacsnsseaeacssneaeenseaeaneneeeae 8-5
Figure’8:6.. Drilled. Wel. sssssomsnsenssnarermnaraannmeennmannnimemrenenamenssmm are 8-5
Figure 8.7. Typical Dug Well .....c.ccccscessssssssessesesesessesescssscseecsucsesescenesescesscacsnsucscseseessacsesssacassnsseacasansneaeensuescaseeeeaes 8-5
Figure’3:8.Sewagein Drainage Ditch ssvcsauvasesmenenenmannnuimemrnemammessmmaremanun NRE 8-6
Figure 8.9. Drilled Well ....c.ccececceesseseseseesesesessssesesessesescssscseecsuescsescenssesceescacsnsucscseseassacsnsesacacsusssacasseaneaeenseeseaseneeeaes 8-6

Figure 8.10. Spring Box ..

Ghapter-92 PLUMBING cies scaiescssnsiesaanseaunnsvansuhssyunt iw santacmuaiyes WusseualinssauayaVanaseo ese cyerntesven Oe 1

Figure 9.1. Typical Home Water System ......c.ccsccsesssseeseseseeseesseessseseesssecsesussesssussesseseseeusseeseaneseeasseeseensseeseseseeseneese 9-1
Figure’9.2. House Service Installation) siscsvsisssnsnsesssvovscesssseaversaservscsunsssorssvarenreanavecsseseesrssreavens anarorseesnesr avant 9-2
Figure 9.3. Gas Water Heater ....cccccccccssesessssssesssesssessessssseesesescssesssesceuesesescsuesesesuesesesessesssesnsucssseanessssaesusseasseeneasseeeenes 9-7

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Contents xi



Page 386: Figure 9.4. Temperature-Pressure Valve ......scscccssseesesssseesssseseeseseeseessseesesneseesesucseessseesesusseesesusseesssesesesseesesusseeesseeseensaees 8
Figure 9.5; Branch: Connections’ cesssensnsasssnarernamaraannsmnnenenmmnaneneunnerenmannnneemenenenman en iETENES 0
Figure 9.6. P-trap ...cscecscscesssssesescscsesescscsescscscscscscsescscscscscscscscscscecscscscsescscsescscscscscscscscscacsescscssscscscscscscscssscscacasscasesaees 0
Figure 9.7; Types'of S-traps ssssswssnssemsneassinarrermamaraannmenenenmmnaxeneumeremnennenmenenen mE: 0
Figure 9.8. Trap Seal 0
Figure 9.9. Loss of Trap Seal in Lavatory Sink 1
Figure 9.10. Back-to-back Venting [Toilet]... ccceessssesesessesesesesseseeesscseaescescsesesssscsesnsusscseseseatssseseasseseacenaseneaears 1
Figure 9.11, Back-to-back Venting [Sink] scsssssesessanarasrensnnnenemmnmnaessusneremnenrnenemenenenmann ieee 1
Figure 9.12. Wall-hung Fixtures 0.0... cecesesessesesessesesssessssesesesseseessesseseeceucsescscsncsesnssescaesnsusscsessescacssssasatsaseaeenseeseaeers 2
Figure 9.13. Unit Vent Used in Bathtub Installationisi-sissvssessssessvssesvsevswversssenssvsrvevesvoeverervetsnvesvsssevorvavensorssvsesesvevsteots 9-12
Figure 9.14. Toilet Venting .......c.cccccccssessessssessesesseessseesesssseesssucseesssesesussessescsecusseeseaueseesssussesessueneaneseesssessecusseeeeaneneens 9-12
Figure 9.15. Janitor’s Sink . 9-13
Figure 9.16. Common Y-trap ...c.cccccscssssesesesesesescscsescsescsescsescscscscecscscssscscscsescssscscscsesescsescscsescscsescscscsessscscscscscesscesenaees 9-13
Figure 9.17. Hose Bib With Vacuum Breaker sssscsssssssvsivsnssessssessvssssvsevswvevsrenstvsrvevesvoeverorsstenneevsnvesorvavnnsornvaesasvevetsoss 9-13
Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment ............ccccsccccsssccccssscccccsssccscsssccsccssscceesssees LO-1
Figure 10.1. Conventional On-site Septic System .......sceceessssesessssesesessesesesesseseseeescaesesesscsesescacsesseseacsnaneasenseeseaeens 10-1
Figure 10.2; Straight Pipe Dischargtvevesssssassceresemnaxennuvennenrnmmnenrenemmnmaeramnn mE REET 10-2
Figure 10.3. Clear Creek Water Contaminated With Sewage........ccccsssssecseseesecssseesesteseesssesseesseeseseseesssesseeneseensaneseens 10-2
Figure 10.4. Septic Tank System

Figure 10.5. Septic Tank

Figure 10.6. On-site Sewage Disposal System Site Evaluation Form .........ccscsscsesessscsessesesesessesesesesseseecsssseasecsenearens 10-5
Figure 10.7. Cross-section of an Absorption Field oo... ccceessssesesessesesesscseseseescscseesescsesnsecscseseessacsnsseseacsneneaeenseseaees
Figure 10.8, Mound Systenr Cutaway wsnsessssasernaacasnnsmenenemmmnanenseunenennnnenmenenemann en ieeereEs
Figure 10.9. Low Pressure On-site System .....c.cccscesssseesesesesesesescsescscscscsesescscscscesscscscsescscsescscscscscscacscscssscsescenscasessees
Figure 10.10;:Plant-rock Filter. systeny ssnswessssersernamarasnensmnnenermmnarenseumenemaennaneemenenenmanaen ieee
Figure 10.11. Sludge and Scum in Multicompartment Septic Tank ..

Chapter 11> Electricity 'scssssssicesseccsesctisiessteweus sccenssscavacssvecsccetsiaeessscsnessacsaessasseessseveevacss L1=1
Figure 11.1, Utility Overview? sescnssemsnsasssnarremmaraannmenenenmmnanasnenmenmnnnemeenm mn ERTENES 11-3
Figure 11.2. Entrance Head

Figure 11.3. Armored Cable Service Entrance ssscsssssssvivsnssessssessvssssvaevswvevsronstvsrvevesvocvecornatenseivsnsevorvavnrsorsnvarscsvevstsoes 11-4
Figure 11.4. Breakers ....c.c.ccceessssesesesessseseescsesesesescsessssescsesseseecsesscseecesesescecsncscsesnescaesnsnsacsessssacaesesssessnaseaeeneeseaees 11-4
Figure 11.5, Thinewall Conduit ccsssemsnsesssnaeramaraannsmenenenmmnananseunnerennnemenenenmannnieeeEs 11-4
Figure 11.6. Electric Meter........ 11-5
Figure 11.7. Typical Service Entrance ee re te ee or ere re ter rere errr rr 11-5
Figure 11.8. Grounding Scheme .....c.cccscscesessssesessesesesessesesesessesescssscseecesesescscescseseeescacsnsucscsesessasssneaeatssneaeenseseaeens 11-6
Figure 11.9, Grounding yesrsssssusenssemnsneranssnarrernamaraannmnnenemmmnaxeneunmenremeran enema maT LENTEENNES 11-6
Figure 11.10. Three-wire Service ....c.c.cscscesessesssesseesesesesesesesseseeesesseseecsucsescscsscseseessscacsnsucscsesessacssseseasseseacensneseaeen 11-7
Figure 11.11. Two-wite Service sscssrsisronsessmrasrrsmnmnnsensmnsr canner anmmnunnsinnsranmmnuneneteneres 11-7
Figure 11.12. Wire Markings .......cccccecsesessesesessesesesessesesesessesescsescseecescsescscsncscsnessscsesnsncscsesescassesesaeatsneseaeenseeneaeens 11-8
Figure 11.13. Armored Cable .. .11-9
Figure 11.14. 200-Amp Service Box ......cceessesssessesssesessesesesessesessssseseecssesesescescsesnessscsesesseassesseseacsaseasacsnsseaeeneeeseaes 11-10
Figure 11.15,:External Power Shutoff and Meter ssscausaseesssanzcensrmnmnaensseussnemmnrananemmensnmmnnnueeren 11-10

xii Contents Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 387: Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating..............ccccccsccccsssscccssssccccsssceee L2-1

Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

L.16. GECI weeceeeeescesesesesessesesesescesesesessesescncsacsesesseaesesesaesenesaeaeseeesesesceaeseneaeaeaceacaeseeseseaeeeseaeeeeecaeseneeseaeaeees 1
Lil 7s Are Interrupter venweescmmeranmmanacarencn mmm man mene RNS 1
1.18. Types Of Fuses ....c.ccccsecsessesesseseeseessseesesesessesessessseesssnesecsssecsseusseesssusseesssecsseesseeacseseeseseessseseeasseeneenes 1
1.19. Appliance Ground and Grounded Plug sscssssesnsersssennensmmeremavesemnaranmnamunanmnanments 1

2.1. Heat Pump in Cooling Mode

2.2. Piping Hookup for Inside Tank Installation’ snsssssnwsesssmuvesenaamnimnnmnammrnmaninnnnmarnins 12-6
2.3. Piping Hookup for Buried Outside Tank

2.4. Minimum Clearance for Pipeless Hot Air and Gravity Warm Air Furmace ......ccsescsesessesesessessseeeeseseee 12-7
2.5. Minimum Clearance for Steam or Hot Water Boiler and Mechanical Warm-air Furnace ........cscecee 12-7
2.6. Heating Ducts Covered With Asbestos Insulation .........scccccsssessesssseeeseeseeseseesesseseesssueseeseseseeseseessaneseess 12-7
2.7. Typical Underfeed Coal Stoker Installation in Small Boilers .. ... 12-8
2.8. Cutaway View of Typical High: pressure Gun Burner wesssszsesesanavneniiennmnnemnsnwencnnvemamavniys 12-9
2.9. Gas-fired Boiler ....c.ceeseesesesessesesssecsesesesscscsessscsesesscsesesessscsessesesssssesescsecseaeeesacaesesesacanseessacansneasansaseaeees 12-9
2.10. Typical Gravity One-pipe Heating System, scmsnsesssessrmneremearesmmerenmmannemmnanmrents 12-10
2.11. One-pipe Gravity Water Heating System ......cccccscsseseceeseseseesesessseesesesceesssesnessssseaesesesseneseseeeeneneeees 2-11
2.12. Two-pipe Gravity Water Heating System sissssisassssssrscsissssessisersrsnssersesivevsonssusersnastonsesivevsenseusesesees 12-11
2.13. Warm air Convection Furnace ....c.ccccceccssesesssesesssesesesescscseseecsescscsescsesesessseseesseseseseseseseseesssssesseseeeneees 2-11
2.14. Cross-sectional View of Building Showing Forced Warm-air Heating System 12-12
2.15. Perforated-sleeve Burner ......s.cssessssesesessesesesessesesesscseseecsseseseseescsesesueacsesesseacseseeacassesssacatsesseaeenseseasenee 2-13
2.16. Condition of Burner Flame with Different Rates of Fuel FIOW .......c.ceceseesseseesesesessesesesesseaeetsesseseees 12-13
2.17. Wall and Ceiling Clearance Reduction ...c.csccccscesseseesecssssesesseseesseneseeseseeseeseseesseusseeassneseessseeseencaeensans 2-14
2.18, Draft Relation.to Height of Chimiey’ sisiesenssmsnasessieessremnaremearemmeremamannnmmrmnanm nents 12-14
2.19. Location and Operation of Typical Backdraft Diverter ........csccscssesesseseeseeeseeseeesseesssneseessseeseeneseensans 2-15
2.20; Splitesystem Air Conditioner: saswccsessesenenmenmnsieenrmnmmenemmrer aman: 12-16
2.21. External Air-conditioning Condenser Unit . 12-16
2.22, Chimney Plan, sasnsvewssnacermmraannmenenenmennnuieemremnemmnmer aman ERTETRTS 12-17
2.23. Fireplace Comstruction ......c.scssessssesesessesesssesscsesesseseseecssesesesesscaesnsscscsesesssacsnseescasseaneacarsusseaeenseseaseete 2-18

Chapter 132 Energy EGfciency sisscecssssssvsscacscassccscevecscccsscavascavesssessaaesessssecsssvasserssesecsacs: 13-1

Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

3.1v Roof Components swvesssrsesenmamneneseneensrmnsnmncmne man nmnmaRAEE MANET
3.2. Potential Effects of Radiant Barriers .......c.ccccssssssesesesssseseseseeseseseececeseseceseseeceaeseseaseaeaeeeseaeaeeeeaeeeeeeseatees
3.3. Common Floor Insulation Flaws wesc sscscvavneewusscusarasinmnucencnsniiennnneaneesnannnnae
3.4a. Insulation Cavity Fill, Lath ....... ve
3c. Insulation Cavity Fill, Metal Rods wesccccsssescenssinsmmrensnacenasnanmrennmrennnanmenmmnnamnanmees
3.4b. Insulation Cavity Fill, Mesh ...c.cecccscesesssesesesesesesesescecsescseseecsesescseseacseaeacseaeecacseacacaeacaeaeacaeacasaeaeaeaeaeaes
34d. Insulation, Cavity Fill, Polypropylene Twine ecnsewssssnusesanaamnninimenmnammnrnmaninnnemmannins
3.5. Solar Panels .....c.cceccssssssesesesssseseseececesesescesesesescesesencsacseseeseacseseeseseuesceaeseeseseseeeeasseseaceaeaeeeeseaeaeeeeaeeeneeseatees

Chapter 14: Residential Swimming Pools and Spas ............sccccssssccsssssccccsssccccesscccesscers L4-1

Figure
Figure

Ail» Pool Covet sscesvesmmressescensnmnsmareseceammnsmarenneamn arene
4.2. Typical Home Pool Equipment System

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Contents

xiii



Page 388: List of Tables

Table 8.1. Recommended Minimum Distance Between Well and Pollution Sources (Horizontal Distance)........ 8-2
Table 8.2. Types of Wells for Accessing Groundwater, Well Depths, and Diameters..........c.cccsecesesseseeeeteseeseeeses 8-3
Table 8.3. Disinfection: Methods ssavscevecissseverasersnssesoxanecucesnvenasevenesnsoxenevesesvvenasvssnesnsonanevusesevenasusumeensasexesuseveveneseeess 8-7
Table 8.4. Chlorination Guide for Specific Water Conditions.......c.cccccccssessesseseeesseseessseesesteseeseesseessseeseseeseeseeeess 8-8
Table 8.5. Preparing‘a 200-ppm Chlorine Solution sccnisscenssscanensssesrnnisorneesanescerevenvenamnimanseannnveeeravens 8-9
Table 8.6. Analyzing and Correction Water Quality Problems ......c.ccceceseesseseseseeseseseeseseseseesesssesenesesnseneeneees 8-11
Table 9.1. Fixeure Unit Valuessrecsweerensrenemmnncenmnmacnnmaseecnarenmannnmnennmemnnnmernereane 9-9
Table 9.2. Sanitary House Drain Sizes .......cccesesesesssessssesesesesessseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseseasseeceeaeaces 9-9
Table 9.3. Minimum Fixture Service Pipe Diameters siisissssssscsssessssseveesresossvesovevessssverveeresossvesevevesnssvanvenreseeveess 9-12
Table 10.1. | Mound System Advantages and Disadvantages.........ccsssssssessesesesessesesesssseseeesseseseeseassnsseasetseaseaeeneees 10-6

Table 10.2. Low-pressure Pipe Systems Advantages and Disadvantages...
Table 10.3. Plant-rock Filter Systems Advantages and Disadvantages..

Table 10.4. Septic Tank System Troubleshooting ...........000 10-10
Table 13.1. Cost-effective Insulation R-values for Existing homes. . 13-2
Table 13.2. _ Potential Effects of Radiant Barriers .. . 13-3
Table 13.3. Floor Insulation.......eececcecscesessesssseeseeseseeseessseesesuesecseescsessssesesuesecseeucsessssuesesueseeseeueseessseseeesseeaeeneneeses 13-5
Table 14.1, Pool Water Quality Problem’ Solving isssssscseesessrenasensenssennssreranninranvenneemanmranveannvererauss 14-7
Table 14.2. pH Effect on Chlorine Disinfection .........ccceccesesecseseesesssseeseseseeseeeeseessseesesseseeseeseseessseesesnsseeseeneaeees 14-8
Table 14.3, ‘Chlorine Useiin Swimming Pools sisvsssssscaressessronasnmenscennnsrrannmnranvennremmnnnanvenmveenaus 14-8
Table 14.4. Swimming Pool Operating Parameters ............cscesessesesessesesesesseseeeescseseeeescaeeneecacarseeseassnsseaeanseaeeseeneees 14-9
Table 14,5.  Spa:and. Hot Tub Operating Parameters s:scisvisisesssesvesvsiveveessissessvarcavevsaavsvevessseseransatnecnveenecerssrenaes 14-10

xiv Contents Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 389: Preface

ousing quality is key to the public’s health. Translating that simple axiom into action is the topic of this

book. In the 30 years since the first edition was published, the nation’s understanding of how specific hous-

ing conditions are related to disease and injury has matured and deepened. This new edition will enable pub-
lic health and housing professionals to grasp our shared responsibility to ensure that our housing stock is safe, decent,
affordable, and healthy for our citizens, especially those who are particularly vulnerable and who spend more time in
the home, such as children and the elderly.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) have worked together with many others to discover the ways to eliminate substandard housing conditions that
harm health. For example, the advances in combating water borne diseases was possible, in part, through standardiza-
tion of indoor plumbing and sewage, and the institution of federal, state and local regulations and codes. Childhood
lead poisoning has been dramatically reduced, in part, through the elimination of residential lead-based paint hazards.
Other advances have been made to protect people from carbon monoxide poisoning, falls, safety hazards, electrocu-
tion, and many other risks.

However, more must be done to control existing conditions and to understand emerging threats that remain poorly
understood. For example, nearly 18 million Americans live with the health threat of contaminated drinking water sup-
plies, especially in rural areas where on-site wastewater systems are prevalent. Despite progress, thousands of children
still face the threat of lead poisoning from residential lead paint hazards. The increase in asthma in recent decades and
its relationship to housing conditions such as excess moisture, mold, settled dust allergens and ventilation remains the
subject of intense research. The impact of energy conservation measures on the home environment is still unfolding.
Simple affordable construction techniques and materials that minimize moisture problems and indoor air pollution,
improve ventilation, and promote durability and efficiency continue to be uncovered.

A properly constructed and maintained home is nearly timeless in its usefulness. A home is often the biggest single
investment people make. This manual will help to ensure that the investment is a sound one that promotes healthy
and safe living.

Home rehabilitation has increased significantly in the last few years and HUD has prepared a nine-part series, The
Rehab Guide, that can assist both residents and contractors in the rehabilitation process. For additional information,
go to http://www.huduser.org/publications/destech/rehabgui.html.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Preface 1



Page 390: 2

Preface

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 391: Acknowledgments

into the original and current versions of this manual. The revisions to this manual were made by a team of
environmental health, housing, and public health professionals led by Professor Joe Beck, Dr. Darryl Barnett,
Dr. Gary Brown, Dr. Carolyn Harvey, Professor Worley Johnson, Dr. Steve Konkel, and Professor Charles Treser.

\ ; ( Te acknowledge the suggestions, assistance, and review of numerous individuals and organizations that went

Individuals from the following organizations were involved in the various drafts of this manual:
¢ Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), Office of Healthy Homes and Lead Hazard Control;

¢ U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
National Center for Environmental Health (NCEH);

National Healthy Homes Training Center and Network;

National Association of Housing and Redevelopment Officials;

Department of Building, Housing and Zoning (Allentown, Pennsylvania);

Code Enforcement Associates (East Orange, New Jersey);

Eastern Kentucky University (Richmond, Kentucky);

University of Washington; Seattle (Washington); and

Battelle Memorial Institute (Columbus, Ohio).

Specifically, our gratitude goes to the following reviewers:

Dr. David Jacobs, Martin Nee, and Dr. Peter Ashley, HUD;

Pat Bohan, East Central University;

James Larue, The House Mender Inc.;

Ellen Tohn, ERT Associates;

Dr. Stephen Margolis, Emory University; and
* Joseph Ponessa and Rebecca Morley, Healthy Homes Training Center.

A special thank-you for assistance from Carolyn Case-Compton, Habitat for Humanity, 123 East Main Street,
Morehead, Kentucky. Pictures of a home under construction are courtesy of Habitat for Humanity and John King,
home builder and instructor, Rowan County Technical College, Morehead, Kentucky; and Don W. Johnson, building
photographer of Habitat for Humanity.

In addition, a special thank you to CAPT Craig Shepherd and CAPT Michael Herring, Commissioned Corps, U.S.
Public Health Service, CDC/NCEH/Environmental Health Services Branch for their research and review during the
editing of this manual. Special thanks to Pamela S. Wigington and Joey L. Johnson for their hard work preparing this
manual for publication and to Teresa M. Sims for Web publication.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Acknowledgments 3



Page 392: 4

Acknowledgments

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 393: ANSI

ASME
ASSE
ASTM
ATSDR
AWG
AWWA
BIU
CDC
CFR
CGA
co
CPR
CPSC
CSIA
DDT
DE
DPD
DWV
EIFS
EPA
EPDM
ETS
FHA
FM
GFCI
HEPA
HHS
HSC
HUD
HVAC
IAPMO

Abbreviations and Acronyms

acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene

Americans with Disabilities Act

American Gas Association

American Lung Association

American National Standards Institute
American Public Health Association
American Society of Mechanical Engineers
American Society of Structural Engineers
American Society for Testing Materials
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
American Wire Gauge

American Waters Works Association

British thermal unit

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Code of Federal Regulations

Canadian Gas Association

carbon monoxide

cardiopulmonary resuscitation

Consumer Product Safety Commission
Chimney Safety Institute of America
dichlorodiphenyltrichlorethane
diatomaceous earth
N,N-diethyl-p-phenylene diamine

drain, waste, and vent

exterior insulation and finish system

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
ethylene propylene dieneterpolymer
environmental tobacco smoke

Federal Housing Administration

Factory Mutual

ground fault circuit interrupter
high-efficiency particulate air

Health and Human Services, U.S. Department of
Home Safety Council

Housing and Urban Development, U.S. Department of
heating, ventilating and air conditioning

International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Abbreviations and Acronyms 5



Page 394: 6

ICC
IPM
ISO

LPP
MPMH
MSS
NCEH
NCI
NIA
NSF
NTU
ODTS
OSHA
PEX
POTW

ppm

PVC
PW
RIFA
SDWA
SEER
T&P
TSP
UF
UL
USCB
USDA
USFA
USGS
USHA
VA
VOC

International Code Council
integrated pest management
International Standard Organization
kilogram

low-pressure pipe

Military Pest Management Handbook

National Center for Environmental Health
National Cancer Institute

National Institute on Aging

National Science Foundation
nephelometric turbidity unit
organic dust toxic syndrome
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
cross-formulated polyethylene
publicly owned treatment works
parts per million

pound per square inch
polyvinyl chloride

potable water

red imported fire ant

Safe Drinking Water Act
seasonal energy efficiency ratio
temperature-pressure

trisodium phosphate
urea-formaldehyde
Underwriters Laboratories

U.S. Census Bureau

U.S. Department of Agriculture
USS. Fire Administration

U.S. Geological Survey

United States Housing Authority
Veteran's Administration
volatile organic compound

X-ray fluorescence

Abbreviations and Acronyms

Mechanical Standardization Society of the Valve and Fitting Industry

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 395: Definitions

Accessory building or structure: a detached building or structure in a secondary or subordinate capacity from the
main or principal building or structure on the same premises.

Appropriate authority/Authority having jurisdiction (AHJ): a person within the governmental structure of the
corporate unit who is charged with the administration of the appropriate code.

Ashes: the residue from burning combustible materials.

Attic: any story or floor of a building situated wholly or partly within the roof, and so designed, arranged, or built to
be used for business, storage, or habitation.

Basement: the lowest story of a building, below the main floor and wholly or partially lower than the surface of
the ground.

Building: a fixed construction with walls, foundation, and roof, such as a house, factory, or garage.

Bulk container: any metal garbage, rubbish, or refuse container having a capacity of 2 cubic yards or greater and
which is equipped with fittings for hydraulic or mechanical emptying, unloading, or removal.

Central heating system: a single system supplying heat to one or more dwelling unit(s) or more than one rooming unit.

Chimney: a vertical masonry shaft of reinforced concrete, or other approved noncombustible, heat-resisting material
enclosing one or more flues, for the purpose of removing products of combustion from solid, liquid, or gaseous fuel.

Dilapidated: in a state of disrepair or ruin and no longer adequate for the purpose or use for which it was originally
intended.

Dormitory: a building or a group of rooms in a building used for institutional living and sleeping purposes by four or
more persons.

Dwelling: any enclosed space wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
(Temporary housing, as hereinafter defined, shall not be classified as a dwelling.) Industrialized housing and modular
construction that conform to nationally accepted industry standards and are used or intended for use for living, sleep-
ing, cooking, and eating purposes shall be classified as dwellings.

Dwelling unit: a room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a single habitable unit with facilities used
or intended to be used by a single family for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.

Egress: arrangements and openings to assure a safe means of exit from buildings.

Extermination: the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by
removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping,
or any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the local or state authority having such
administrative authority. Extermination is one of the components of integrated pest management.

Fair market value: a price at which both buyers and sellers will do business.

Family: one or more individuals living together and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, and eating facilities
(See also Household).

Flush toilet: a toilet bowl that can be flushed with water supplied under pressure and that is equipped with a water-
sealed trap above the floor level.

Garbage: animal and vegetable waste resulting from handling, preparation, cooking, serving, and nonconsumption
of food.

Grade: the finished ground level adjacent to a required window.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Definitions rs



Page 396: Guest: an individual who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent status for not more than 30 days.

Habitable room: a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating
purposes, excluding bathrooms, laundries, furnace rooms, pantries, kitchenettes and utility rooms of less than 50
square feet of floor space, foyers, or communicating corridors, stairways, closets, storage spaces, workshops, and hobby
and recreation areas.

Health officer: the legally designated health authority of the jurisdiction or that person’s authorized representative.
Heated water: water heated to a temperature of not less than 120°F—130°F (49°C-54°C) at the outlet.

Heating device: all furnaces, unit heaters, domestic incinerators, cooking and heating stoves and ranges, and other
similar devices.

Household: one or more individuals living together in a single dwelling unit and sharing common living, sleeping,
cooking, and eating facilities (see also Family).

Infestation: the presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents, or other pests.

Integrated pest management: a coordinated approach to managing roaches, rodents, mosquitoes, and other pests that
combines inspection, monitoring, treatment, and evaluation, with special emphasis on the decreased use of toxic agents.

Kitchen: any room used for the storage and preparation of foods and containing the following equipment: sink or
other device for dishwashing, stove or other device for cooking, refrigerator or other device for cold storage of food,
cabinets or shelves for storage of equipment and utensils, and counter or table for food preparation.

Kitchenette: a small kitchen or an alcove containing cooking facilities.

Lead-based paint: any paint or coating with lead content equal to or greater than 1 milligram per square centimeter,

or 0.5% by weight.
Multiple dwelling: any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.

Occupant: any individual, over 1 year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in or having possession of a dwelling
unit or a rooming unit; except that in dwelling units a guest shall not be considered an occupant.

Operator: any person who has charge, care, control or management of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling
units or rooming units are let.

Ordinary summer conditions: a temperature 10°F (-12°C) below the highest recorded temperature in the locality for
the prior 10-year period.

Ordinary winter conditions: mean a temperature 15°F (-9.4°C) above the lowest recorded temperature in the locality
for the prior 10-year period.

Owner: any person who alone, jointly, or severally with others (a) shall have legal title to any premises, dwelling, or
dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or (b) shall have charge, care or control of any
premises, dwelling, or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian
of the estate of the owner.

Permissible occupancy: the maximum number of individuals permitted to reside in a dwelling unit, rooming unit, or
dormitory.

Person: any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, cooperative, or government agency.

Plumbing: all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes,
garbage disposal units, waste pipes, toilets, sinks, installed dishwashers, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes wash-
ing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and similarly supplied fixtures, and the installation thereof, together with all
connections to water, sewer, or gas lines.

8 Definitions Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 397: Privacy: the existence of conditions which will permit an individual or individuals to carry out an activity commenced
without interruption or interference, either by sight or sound by unwanted individuals.

Rat harborage: any conditions or place where rats can live, nest or seek shelter.

Ratproofing: a form of construction that will prevent the entry or exit of rats to or from a given space or building, or
from gaining access to food, water, or harborage. It consists of the closing and keeping closed of every opening in
foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior walls, ground or first floors, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk
openings, and other places that may be reached and entered by rats by climbing, burrowing, or other methods, by the
use of materials impervious to rat gnawing and other methods approved by the appropriate authority.

Refuse: leftover and discarded organic and nonorganic solids (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes,
and dead animals.

Refuse container: a watertight container that is constructed of metal, or other durable material impervious to rodents,
that is capable of being serviced without creating unsanitary conditions, or such other containers as have been
approved by the appropriate authority (see also Appropriate Authority). Openings into the container, such as covers and
doors, shall be tight fitting.

Rooming house: any dwelling other than a hotel or motel or that part of any dwelling containing one or more room-
ing units, or one or more dormitory rooms, and in which persons either individually or as families are housed with or
without meals being provided.

Rooming unit: any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living
and sleeping, but not for cooking purposes.

Rubbish: nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of either: (a) combustible wastes such as paper, card-
board, plastic containers, yard clippings and wood; or (b) noncombustible wastes such as cans, glass, and crockery.

Safety: the condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards that may cause accidents or disease.

Space heater: a self-contained heating appliance of either the convection type or the radiant type and intended pri-
marily to heat only a limited space or area such as one room or two adjoining rooms.

Supplied: paid for, furnished by, provided by, or under the control of the owner, operator or agent.
System: the dynamic interrelationship of components designed to enact a vision.

Systems theory: The concept proposed to promote the dynamic interrelationship of activities designed to accomplish
a unified system.

Temporary housing: any tent, trailer, mobile home, or other structure used for human shelter that is designed to be
transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system on the same
premises for more than 30 consecutive days.

Toxic substance: any chemical product applied on the surface of or incorporated into any structural or decorative
material, or any other chemical, biologic, or physical agent in the home environment or its immediate surroundings,
which constitutes a potential hazard to human health at acute or chronic exposure levels.

Variance: a difference between that which is required or specified and that which is permitted.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Definitions 9



Page 398: 10 Definitions Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 399: Standards and Organizations

n addition to the standards and organizations listed in this section, the U.S. Justice Department enforces the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) (http://www.ada.gov) and assures that products fully
comply with the provisions of the act to ensure equal access for physically challenged users.

ABPA

ACI

AGA

AGC

AMSA

ANSI

ASCE

ASHI

ASHRAE

ASME

ASSE

ASTM

The American Backflow Prevention Association, http://abpa.org
Develops cross-connections; ABPA is an organization whose members have a common interest in
protecting drinking water from contamination.

American Concrete Institute, http://www.concrete.org/general/home.asp

Has produced more than 400 technical documents, reports, guides, specifications, and codes for the
best use of concrete. ACI conducts more than 125 educational seminars each year and has 13
certification programs for concrete practitioners, as well as a scholarship program to promote careers in
the industry.

American Gas Association, http://www.aga.org
Develops standards, tests, and qualifies products used in gas lines and gas appliance installations.

Associated General Contractors of America, http://www.agc.org

Is dedicated to improving the construction industry by educating the industry to employ the finest
skills, promoting use of the latest technology and advocating building the best quality projects for
owners—public and private.

Association of Metropolitan Sewerage Agencies, http://www.amsa-cleanwater.org
Represents the interests of the country’s wastewater treatment agencies.

American National Standards Institute, http://www.ansi.org
Coordinates work among U.S. standards writing groups. Works in conjunction with other groups such
as ISO, ASME, and ASTM.

Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Institute, http://www.ari.org

Provides information about the 21st Century Research (21-CR) initiative, a private-public sector
research collaboration of the heating, ventilation, air-conditioning, and refrigeration industry, with a
focus on energy conservation, indoor environmental quality, and environmental protection.

American Society of Civil Engineers, http://www.asce.org
Provides essential value to its members, careers, partners, and the public by developing leadership,
advancing technology, advocating lifelong learning, and promoting the profession.

The American Society of Home Inspectors, http://www.ashi.org

Is a source of information about the home inspection profession.

American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, http://www.ashrae.org
Writes standards and guidelines that include uniform methods of testing for rating purposes, describe
recommended practices in designing and installing equipment and provide other information to guide
the industry. ASHRAE has more than 80 active standards and guideline project committees,
addressing such broad areas as indoor air quality, thermal comfort, energy conservation in buildings,
reducing refrigerant emissions, and the designation and safety classification of refrigerants.

The American Society of Mechanical Engineers, http://www.asme.org
Develops standards for materials and testing as well as finished products.

American Society of Sanitary Engineering, http://www.asse.org
Develops standards and qualifies products for plumbing and sanitary installations.

American Society for Testing and Materials, http://www.astm.org
Is one of the largest voluntary standards development organizations in the world-a trusted source for
technical standards for materials, products, systems, and services.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Standards and Organizations 11



Page 400: 12

AWWA

CGA

CPSC

CRBT

EPA

FM

HFHI

HUD

IAPMO

ICBO

ICC

ISO

American Water Works Association, http://www.awwa.org
Promotes public health through improvement of the quality of water and develops standards for valves,
fittings, and other equipment.

Canadian Gas Association, http://www.cga.ca
Develops standards, tests, and qualifies products used in gas lines and gas appliance installations.

U.S Consumer Product Safety Commission, http://www.cpsc.gov

Protects the public from unreasonable risks for serious injury or death from more than 15,000 types of
consumer products. CPSC is committed to protecting consumers and families from products that pose
a fire, electrical, chemical, or mechanical hazard or can injure children.

Center for Resourceful Building Technology, http://www.crbt.org

Contains the online Guide to Resource-Efficient Building Elements, which provides information about
environmentally efficient construction materials, including foundations, wall systems, panels,
insulation, siding, roofing, doors, windows, interior finishing, and floor coverings.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, http://www.epa.gov
Protects human health and the environment.

Factory Mutual, http://fmglobal.com
Develops standards and qualifies products for use by the general public and develops standards for

materials, products, systems, and services.

Habitat for Humanity International, http://www.habitat.org
Is a nonprofit, ecumenical Christian housing ministry. HFHI seeks to eliminate poverty housing and
homelessness from the world, and to make decent shelter a matter of conscience and action.

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, http://www.hud.gov

As part of the HUD efforts toward eliminating childhood lead poisoning, the Office of Healthy
Homes and Lead Hazard Control is sharing local lead ordinances and regulations that have proven
effective in helping communities deal with lead-based paint hazards. Also, the design and construction
of manufactured housing are regulated by the federal government and must comply with HUD’s
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards. Modular and panelized construction must
comply with model or local building codes.

International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, http://www.iapmo.org

Developed and maintains the Uniform Plumbing Code and the Uniform Mechanical Code.

The Uniform Building Code (UBC)/International Conference of Building Officials,
http://www.iccsafe.org

Is the most widely adopted model building code in the world and is a proven document meeting the
needs of government units charged with enforcement of building regulation. Published triennially, the
UBC provides complete regulations covering all major aspects of building design and construction
relating to fire and life safety and structural safety. The requirements reflect the latest technologic
advances available in the building and fire- and life-safety industry.

International Code Council, http://www.iccsafe.org

Produces the most widely adopted and enforced building safety codes in the United States (I-Codes).
International Residential Code (IRC) 2003 has been adopted by many states, jurisdictions, and
localities. IRC also references several industry standards such as ACI 318, ASCE 7, ASTM, and ANSI
standards that cover specific load, load combinations, design methods, and material specifications.

International Standard Organization, http://www.iso.org

Provides internationally recognized certification for manufacturers that comply with high standards of
quality control, developed standards ISO-9000 through ISO-9004, and qualifies and lists products
suitable for use in plumbing installations.

Standards and Organizations Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 401: MSS

NACHI

NAHB

NEC

NESC

NFPA

NOWRA

NSF

WEF

Manufacturers Standardization Society of the Valve and Fittings Industry, Inc.,
hetp://www.mss-hq.com
Develops technical codes and standards for the valve and fitting industry.

The National Association of Certified Home Inspectors, http://www.nachi.org/index.htm
Is the world’s largest, most elite nonprofit inspection association.

National Association of Home Builders, http://www.nahb.org

Is a trade association representing more than 220,000 residential home building and remodeling
industry members. NAHB is affiliated with more than 800 state and local home builders associations
around the country. NAHB urges codes and standards development and application that protects
public health and safety without cost impacts that decrease affordability and consequently prevent
people from moving into new, healthier, safer homes.

National Electrical Code, http://www.nfpa.org

Protects public safety by establishing requirements for electrical wiring and equipment in virtually all
buildings.

National Environmental Services Center, http://www.nesc.wvu.edu/nesc/nesc_about.htm

Is a repository for water, wastewater, solid waste, and environmental training research.

National Fire Protection Association, http://www.nfpa.org/index.asp

Develops, publishes, and disseminates more than 300 consensus codes and standards intended to
minimize the possibility and effects of fire and other risks.

National Onsite Wastewater Recycling Association, http://www.nowra.org
Provides leadership and promotes the onsite wastewater treatment and recycling industry through
education, training, communication, and quality tools to support excellence in performance.

National Sanitation Foundation, http://www.nsf.org
Develops standards for equipment, products and services; a nonprofit organization now known as
International.

Underwriters Laboratory, http://www.ul.com
Has developed more than 800 Standards for Safety. Millions of products and their components are
tested to UL’ rigorous safety standards.

Water Environment Federation, http://www.wef.org

Is a not-for-profit technical and educational organization with members from varied disciplines who
work toward the WEF vision of preservation and enhancement of the global water environment. The
WEF network includes water quality professionals from 76 member associations in 30 countries.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Standards and Organizations 13



Page 402: 14 Standards and Organizations Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 403: Executive Summary

he original Basic Housing Inspection manual was published in 1976 by the Center for Disease Control
(now known as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). Its Foreword stated:

“The growing numbers of new families and the increasing population in the United States have created a
pressing demand for additional housing that is conducive to healthful living. These demands are increased by
the continuing loss of existing housing through deterioration resulting from age and poor maintenance. Large
numbers of communities in the past few years have adopted housing codes and initiated code enforcement
programs to prevent further deterioration of existing housing units. This growth in housing activities has
caused a serious problem for communities in obtaining qualified personnel to provide the array of housing
service needed, such as information, counseling, technical advice, inspections, and enforcement. As a result
many agencies throughout the country are conducting comprehensive housing inspection training courses.
This publication has been designed to be an integral part of these training sessions.”

The original Basic Housing Inspection manual has been successfully used for several decades by public health and
housing personnel across the United States. Although much has changed in the field of housing construction and
maintenance, and health and safety issues have expanded, the manual continues to have value, especially as it relates
to older housing.

Many housing deficiencies impact on health and safety. For example, lead-based paint and dust may contribute to
lead poisoning in children; water leakage and mold may contribute to asthma episodes; improper use and storage of
pesticides may result in unintentional poisoning; and lack of working smoke, ionization, and carbon monoxide alarms
may cause serious injury and death.

Government agencies have been very responsive to “healthy homes” issues. The U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) created an office with an exclusive focus on healthy homes. In 2003, CDC joined HUD
in the effort to improve housing conditions through the training of environmental health practitioners, public health
nurses, housing specialists, and others who have interest and responsibility for creating healthy homes.

The revised Basic Housing Inspection manual, renamed the Healthy Housing Reference Manual, responds to the enor-
mous changes that have occurred in housing construction methods and materials and to new knowledge related to the
impact of housing on health and safety. New chapters have been added, making the manual more comprehensive. For
example, an entire chapter is devoted to rural water supplies and on-site wastewater treatment. A new chapter was
added that discusses issues related to residential swimming pools and spas. At over 200 pages, the comprehensive
revised manual is designed primarily as a reference document for public health and housing professionals who work in
government and industry.

The Healthy Housing Reference Manual contains 14 chapters, each with a specific focus. All chapters contain annotated
references and a listing of sources for additional topic information. A summary of the content of each chapter follows:

Chapter One, Housing History and Purpose, describes the history of dwellings and urbanization and housing
trends during the last century.

Chapter Two, Basic Principles of Healthy Housing, describes the basic principles of healthy housing and
safety—physiologic needs, psychologic needs, protection against injury and disease—and lays the groundwork for
following chapters.

Chapter Three, Housing Regulations, reviews the history of housing regulations, followed by a discussion of
zoning, housing, and building codes.

Chapter Four, Disease Vectors and Pests, provides a detailed analysis of disease vectors that have an impact on res-
idences. It includes information on the management of mice, rats, cockroaches, fleas, flies, termites, and fire ants.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Executive Summary 15



Page 404: Chapter Five, Indoor Air Pollution and Toxic Materials, provides information on indoor air pollution, both
biologic and chemical, and to toxic materials in the home, including methods for controlling these hazards. The
impact of cockroaches, dust mites, pets, and mold are discussed. Also included is information about the impact of
carbon monoxide, ozone, tobacco smoke, volatile organic compounds, radon, and pesticides.

Chapter Six, Housing Structure, contains information about “older” housing construction and new construction
materials and methods. The chapter also introduces new terminologies and includes information about founda-
tions, vapor barriers, house framing, roof framing, exterior walls, and roofs.

Chapter Seven, Environmental Barriers, provides information on roofing, insulation, and siding materials.

Chapter Eight, Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues, covers issues related to the drilling and proper
maintenance of wells. Research information is provided that indicates that many wells are not properly sealed,
allowing for the leakage of contaminated water into wells during hurricanes and periods of significant flooding.

Chapter Nine, Plumbing, provides information on plumbing standards and how they can be accessed, followed
by a review of the elements of a residential water delivery system, the types of available hot-water heaters, drainage
systems, and methods for water conservation. It also includes a visual synthesis of water system components during
new residential construction.

Chapter Ten, On-site Wastewater Treatment, complements chapter seven by providing information on proper
on-site methods for the treatment of human waste.

Chapter Eleven, Electricity, expands on information contained in the original manual covering such topics as
breaker systems and polarized plugs and connectors. It also provides a format for the inspection of residential
electrical systems.

Chapter Twelve, Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilation, provides information about types of residential
fuels and heating systems, including solar heating and minor sources of heating (e.g., coal-fired, oil-fired, gas-fired,
and electrical space heaters). Chimney and fireplace safety and the variety of cooling systems are also discussed.

Chapter Thirteen, Energy Efficiency, discusses energy efficiency, including “R” values and their interpretation,
roof ventilation, wall and floor insulation, and door and window energy efficiency systems. It also discusses active
and passive solar systems and provides a methodology for conducting a residential energy audit.

Chapter Fourteen, Residential Swimming Pools and Spas, provides information about child safety, pool and spa
hazards, and diseases. It also provides information on methods for testing and ensuring a safe water system and on
methods for spa and pool disinfection. Further, it covers concerns related to unregulated individual residential pools
and spas.

The quality of housing plays a decisive role in the health status of its occupants. Substandard housing conditions have
been linked to adverse health effects such as childhood lead poisoning, asthma and other respiratory conditions, and
unintentional injuries. This new and revised Healthy Housing Reference Manual is an important reference for anyone
with responsibility and interest in creating and maintaining healthy housing.

The housing design and construction industry has made great progress in recent years through the development of
new innovative techniques, materials technologies, and products. The HUD Rehab Guide series was developed to
inform the design and construction industry about state-of-the-art materials and innovative practices in housing reha-
bilitation. The series focuses on building technologies, materials, components, and techniques rather than on projects
such as adding a new room. The nine volumes each cover a distinct element of housing rehabilitation and feature
breakthrough materials, labor-saving tools, and cost-cutting practices. The nine volumes address foundations; exterior
walls; roofs; windows and doors; partitions, ceilings, floors, and stairs; kitchen and baths; electrical/electronics; heat-
ing, air conditioning, and ventilation; plumbing; and site work.

Additional information about the series can be found at http://www.huduser.org/publications/destech/rehabgui.html
and http://www.pathnet.org/sp.asp?id=997. This series is an excellent adjunct to the Healthy Housing Reference Manual.

16 Executive Summary Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 405: Chapter 1: Housing History and Purpose

“Safe, affordable housing is a basic necessity for every family.
Without a decent place to live, people cannot be productive
members of society, children cannot learn and families can-
not thrive.”

Tracy Kaufman, Research Associate

National Low Income Housing Coalition/

Low Income Housing Information Service
http://www.habitat.org/how/poverty.html; 2003

Introduction

The term “shelter,” which is often used to define housing,
has a strong connection to the ultimate purpose of hous-
ing throughout the world. The mental image of a shelter
is of a safe, secure place that provides both privacy and
protection from the elements and the temperature
extremes of the outside world.

This vision of shelter, however, is complex. The earth-
quake in Bam, Iran, before dawn on December 26, 2003,
killed in excess of 30,000 people, most of whom were
sleeping in their homes. Although the homes were made
of the most simple construction materials, many were
well over a thousand years old. Living in a home where
generation after generation had been raised should pro-
vide an enormous sense of security. Nevertheless, the
world press has repeatedly implied that the construction
of these homes destined this disaster. The homes in Iran
were constructed of sun-dried mud-brick and mud.

We should think of our homes as a legacy to future gen-
erations and consider the negative environmental effects
of building them to serve only one or two generations
before razing or reconstructing them. Homes should be
built for sustainability and for ease in future modifica-
tion. We need to learn the lessons of the earthquake in
Iran, as well as the 2003 heat wave in France that killed
in excess of 15,000 people because of the lack of climate
control systems in their homes. We must use our experi-
ence, history, and knowledge of both engineering and
human health needs to construct housing that meets the
need for privacy, comfort, recreation, and health
maintenance.

Health, home construction, and home maintenance are
inseparable because of their overlapping goals. Many
highly trained individuals must work together to achieve
quality, safe, and healthy housing. Contractors, builders,
code inspectors, housing inspectors, environmental health
officers, injury control specialists, and epidemiologists all

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

are indispensable to achieving the goal of the best hous-
ing in the world for U.S. citizens. This goal is the basis
for the collaboration of the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD) and the Centers for
Disease and Control and Prevention (CDC).

Preurban Housing

inhabitants. The housing similarities among civilizations
separated by vast distances may have been a result of a
shared heritage, common influences, or chance.

Caves were accepted as dwellings, perhaps because they
were ready made and required little or no construction.
However, in areas with no caves, simple shelters were con-
structed and adapted to the availability of resources and
the needs of the population. Classification systems have
been developed to demonstrate how dwelling types
evolved in preurban indigenous settings [1].

Ephemeral Dwellings

Ephemeral dwellings, also known as transient dwellings,
were typical of nomadic peoples. The African bushmen
and Australia’s aborigines are examples of societies whose
existence depends on an economy of hunting and food
gathering in its simple form. Habitation of an ephemeral
dwelling is generally a matter of days.

Episodic Dwellings

Episodic housing is exemplified by the Inuit igloo, the
tents of the Tungus of eastern Siberia, and the very simi-
lar tents of the Lapps of northern Europe. These groups
are more sophisticated than those living in ephemeral
dwellings, tend to be more skilled in hunting or fishing,
inhabit a dwelling for a period of weeks, and have a
greater effect on the environment. These groups also con-
struct communal housing and often practice slash-and-
burn cultivation, which is the least productive use of
cropland and has a greater environmental impact than the
hunting and gathering of ephemeral dwellers.

Periodic Dwellings

Periodic dwellings are also defined as regular temporary
dwellings used by nomadic tribal societies living in a pas-
toral economy. This type of housing is reflected in the
yurt used by the Mongolian and Kirgizian groups and the
Bedouins of North Africa and western Asia. These groups’
dwellings essentially demonstrate the next step in the evo-
lution of housing, which is linked to societal develop-

Chapter 1: Housing History and Purpose 1-1



Page 406: ment. Pastoral nomads are distinguished from people
living in episodic dwellings by their homogenous cultures
and the beginnings of political organization. Their envi-
ronmental impact increases with their increased depen-
dence on agriculture rather than livestock.

Seasonal Dwellings

Schoenauer [1] describes seasonal dwellings as reflective of
societies that are tribal in nature, seminomadic, and based
on agricultural pursuits that are both pastoral and mar-
ginal. Housing used by seminomads for several months or
for a season can be considered semisedentary and reflec-
tive of the advancement of the concept of property, which
is lacking in the preceding societies. This concept of
property is primarily of communal property, as opposed
to individual or personal property. This type of housing is
found in diverse environmental conditions and is demon-
strated in North America by the hogans and armadas of
the Navajo Indians. Similar housing can be found in
Tanzania (Barabaig) and in Kenya and Tanzania (Masai).

Semipermanent Dwellings

According to Schoenauer [1], sedentary folk societies or
hoe peasants practicing subsistence agriculture by cultivat-
ing staple crops use semipermanent dwellings. These
groups tend to live in their dwellings various amounts of
time, usually years, as defined by their crop yields. When
land needs to lie fallow, they move to more fertile areas.
Groups in the Americas that used semipermanent dwell-
ings included the Mayans with their oval houses and the
Hopi, Zuni, and Acoma Indians in the southwestern
United States with their pueblos.

Permanent Dwellings

The homes of sedentary agricultural societies, whose
political and social organizations are defined as nations
and who possess surplus agricultural products, exemplify
this type of dwelling. Surplus agricultural products
allowed the division of labor and the introduction of
other pursuits aside from food production; however, agri-
culture is still the primary occupation for a significant
portion of the population. Although they occurred at dif-
ferent points in time, examples of early sedentary agricul-
tural housing can be found in English cottages, such as
the Suffolk, Cornwall, and Kent cottages [1].

Urbanization

Permanent dwellings went beyond simply providing shel-
ter and protection and moved to the consideration of
comfort. These structures began to find their way into
what is now known as the urban setting. The earliest

1-2 Chapter 1: Housing History and Purpose

available evidence suggests that towns came into existence
around 4000 BC. Thus began the social and public
health problems that would increase as the population of
cities increased in number and in sophistication. In
preurban housing, the sparse concentration of people
allowed for movement away from human pollution or
allowed the dilution of pollution at its location. The
movement of populations into urban settings placed indi-
viduals in close proximity, without the benefit of previous
linkages and without the ability to relocate away from
pollution or other people.

Urbanization was relatively slow to begin, but once started,
it accelerated rapidly. In the 1800s, only about 3% of the
population of the world could be found in urban settings
in excess of 5,000 people. This was soon to change. The
year 1900 saw the percentage increase to 13.6% and sub-
sequently to 29.8% in 1950. The world’s urban popula-
tion has grown since that time. By 1975, more than one in
three of the world’s population lived in an urban setting,
with almost one out of every two living in urban areas by
1997. Industrialized countries currently find approxi-
mately 75% of their population in an urban setting. The
United Nations projects that in 2015 the world’s urban
population will rise to approximately 55% and that in
industrialized nations it will rise to just over 80%.

In the Western world, one of the primary forces driving
urbanization was the Industrial Revolution. The basic
source of energy in the earliest phase of the Industrial
Revolution was water provided by flowing rivers.
Therefore, towns and cities grew next to the great water-
ways. Factory buildings were of wood and stone and
matched the houses in which the workers lived, both in
construction and in location. Workers’ homes were little
different in the urban setting than the agricultural homes
from whence they came. However, living close to the
workplace was a definite advantage for the worker of the
time. When the power source for factories changed from
water to coal, steam became the driver and the construc-
tion materials became brick and cast iron, which later
evolved into steel. Increasing populations in cities and
towns increased social problems in overcrowded slums.
The lack of inexpensive, rapid public transportation
forced many workers to live close to their work. These
factory areas were not the pastoral areas with which many
were familiar, but were bleak with smoke and other
pollutants.

The inhabitants of rural areas migrated to ever-expanding
cities looking for work. Between 1861 and 1911 the pop-
ulation of England grew by 80%. The cities and towns of
England were woefully unprepared to cope with the

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 407: resulting environmental problems, such as the lack of
potable water and insufficient sewerage.

In this atmosphere, cholera was rampant; and death rates
resembled those of Third World countries today. Children
had a one in six chance of dying before the age of 1 year.
Because of urban housing problems, social reformers such
as Edwin Chadwick began to appear. Chadwick's Report
on an Enquiry into the Sanitary Condition of the Labouring
Population of Great Britain and on the Means of its
Improvement [2] sought many reforms, some of which
concerned building ventilation and open spaces around
the buildings. However, Chadwick's primary contention
was that the health of the working classes could be
improved by proper street cleaning, drainage, sewage,
ventilation, and water supplies. In the United States,
Shattuck et al. [3] wrote the Report of the Sanitary
Commission of Massachusetts, which was printed in 1850.
In the report, 50 recommendations were made. Among
those related to housing and building issues were recom-
mendations for protecting school children by ventilation
and sanitation of school buildings, emphasizing town
planning and controlling overcrowded tenements and cel-
lar dwellings. Figure 1.1 demonstrates the conditions
common in the tenements.

In 1845, Dr. John H. Griscom, the City Inspector of
New York, published The Sanitary Condition of the
Laboring Population of New York [4]. His document
expressed once again the argument for housing reform
and sanitation. Griscom is credited with being the first to
use the phrase “how the other half lives.” During this
time, the poor were not only subjected to the physical
problems of poor housing, but also were victimized by
corrupt landlords and builders.

Trends in Housing

The term “tenement house” was first used in America and
dates from the mid-nineteenth century. It was often inter-
twined with the term “slum.” Wright [5] notes that in
English, tenement meant “an abode for a person or for
the soul, when someone else owned the property.” Slum,
on the other hand, initially was used at the beginning of
the 19th century as a slang term for a room. By the mid-
dle of the century, slum had evolved into a term for a
back dwelling occupied by the lowest members of society.
Von Hoffman [6] states that this term had, by the end of
the century, begun to be used interchangeably with tene-
ment. The author noted that in the larger cities of the
United States, the apartment house emerged in the 1830s
as a housing unit of two to five stories, with each story
containing apartments of two to four rooms. It was origi-

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

nally built for the upper group of the working class. The
tenement house emerged in the 1830s when landlords
converted warehouses into inexpensive housing designed
to accommodate Irish and black workers. Additionally,
existing large homes were subdivided and new structures
were added, creating rear houses and, in the process,
eliminating the traditional gardens and yards behind
them. These rear houses, although new, were no healthier
than the front house, often housing up to 10 families.
When this strategy became inadequate to satisfy demand,
the epoch period of the tenements began.

Although unpopular, the tenement house grew in num-
bers, and, by 1850 in New York and Boston, each tene-
ment housed an average of 65 people. During the 1850s,
the railroad house or railroad tenement was introduced.
This structure was a solid, rectangular block with a nar-
row alley in the back. The structure was typically 90 feet
long and had 12 to 16 rooms, each about 6 feet by 6 feet
and holding around four people. The facility allowed no
direct light or air into rooms except those facing the street
or alley. Further complicating this structure was the lack
of privacy for the tenants. A lack of hallways eliminated

Chapter 1: Housing History and Purpose 1-3



Page 408: History of the Department of Housing and Urban Development

Serviceman’s

suburbia begins.

any semblance of privacy. Open sewers, a single privy in
the back of the building, and uncollected garbage resulted
in an objectionable and unhygienic place to live.
Additionally, the wood construction common at the time,
coupled with coal and wood heating, made fire an ever-
present danger. As a result of a series of tenement fires in
1860 in New York, such terms as death-trap and fire-trap
were coined to describe the poorly constructed living

facilities [6].

The two last decades of the 19th century saw the intro-
duction and development of dumbbell tenements, a front
and rear tenement connected by a long hall. These tene-
ments were typically five stories, with a basement and no
elevator (elevators were not required for any building of
less than six stories). Dumbbell tenements, like other ten-
ements, resulted in unaesthetic and unhealthy places to
live. Garbage was often thrown down the airshafts, natu-

1-4 Chapter 1: Housing History and Purpose

adjustment Act creates Veteran Administration mortgages; trend to

ral light was confined to the first floor hallway, and the
public hallways only contained one or two toilets and a
sink. This apparent lack of sanitary facilities was com-
pounded by the fact that many families took in boarders
to help with expenses. In fact, 44,000 families rented
space to boarders in New York in 1890, with this increas-
ing to 164,000 families in 1910. In the early 1890s, New
York had a population of more than 1 million, of which
70% were residents of multifamily dwellings. Of this
group, 80% lived in tenements consisting mostly of
dumbbell tenements.

The passage of the New York Tenement House Act of
1901 spelled the end of the dumbbells and acceptance of
a new tenement type developed in the 1890s—the park
or central court tenement, which was distinguished by a
park or open space in the middle of a group of buildings.

This design was implemented to reduce the activity on

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 409: the front street and to enhance the opportunity for fresh
air and recreation in the courtyard. The design often
included roof playgrounds, kindergartens, communal
laundries, and stairways on the courtyard side.

Although the tenements did not go away, reform groups
supported ideas such as suburban cottages to be devel-
oped for the working class. These cottages were two-story
brick and timber, with a porch and a gabled roof.
According to Wright [5], a Brooklyn project called
Homewood consisted of 53 acres of homes in a planned
neighborhood from which multifamily dwellings, saloons,
and factories were banned.

Although there were many large homes for the well-to-
do, single homes for the not-so-wealthy were not abun-
dant. The first small house designed for the individual of
modest means was the bungalow. According to
Schoenauer [1], bungalows originated in India. The bun-
galow was introduced into the United States in 1880 with
the construction of a home in Cape Cod. The bungalow,
derived for use in tropical climates, was especially popular
in California.

Company towns were another trend in housing in the
19th century. George Pullman, who built railway cars in
the 1880s, and John H. Patterson, of the National Cash
Register Company, developed notable company towns.
Wright [5] notes that in 1917 the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Standards estimated that at least 1,000 industrial firms
were providing housing for their employees. The provi-
sion of housing was not necessarily altruistic. The motiva-
tion for providing housing varied from company to
company. Such motivations included the use of housing
as a recruitment incentive for skilled workers, a method
of linking the individual to the company, and a belief
that a better home life would make the employees hap-
pier and more productive in their jobs. Some companies,
such as Firestone and Goodyear, went beyond the com-
pany town and allowed their employees to obtain loans
for homes from company-established banks. A prime
motivator of company town planning was sanitation,
because maintaining the worker’s health could potentially
lead to fewer workdays lost due to illness. Thus, in the
development of the town, significant consideration was
given to sanitary issues such as window screens, sewage
treatment, drainage, and water supplies.

Before World War I there was a shortage of adequate
dwellings. Even after World War I, insufficient funding, a
shortage of skilled labor, and a dearth of building materi-
als compounded the problem. However, the design of
homes after the war was driven in part by health consid-

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

erations, such as providing good ventilation, sun orienta-
tion and exposure, potable pressurized water, and at least
one private toilet. Schoenauer [1] notes that, during the
postwar years, the improved mobility of the public led to
an increase in the growth of suburban areas, exemplified
by the detached and sumptuous communities outside
New York, such as Oyster Bay. In the meantime, the con-
ditions of working populations consisting of many immi-
grants began to improve with the improving economy of
the 1920s. The garden apartment became popular. These
units were well lighted and ventilated and had a court-
yard, which was open to all and well maintained.

Immediately after World War I and during the 1920s,
city population growth was outpaced by population
growth in the suburbs by a factor of two. The focus at the
time was on the single-family suburban dwelling. The
1920s were a time of growth, but the decade following
the Great Depression, beginning in 1929, was one of
deflation, cessation of building, loss of mortgage financ-
ing, and the plunge into unemployment of large numbers
of building trade workers. Additionally, 1.5 million home
loans were foreclosed during this period. In 1936, the
housing market began to make a comeback; however, the
1930s would come to be known as the beginning of pub-
lic housing, with increased public involvement in housing
construction, as demonstrated by the many laws passed
during the era [5]. The National Housing Act was passed
by Congress in 1934 and set up the Federal Housing
Administration. This agency encouraged banks, building
and loan associations, and others to make loans for build-
ing homes, small business establishments, and farm build-
ings. If the Federal Housing Administration approved the
plans, it would insure the loan. In 1937, Congress passed
another National Housing Act that enabled the Federal
Housing Administration to take control of slum clear-
ance. It made 60-year loans at low interest to local gov-
ernments to help them build apartment blocks. Rents in
these homes were fixed and were only available to low-
income families. By 1941, the agency had assisted in the
construction of more than 120,000 family units.

During World War II, the focus of home building was on
housing for workers who were involved in the war effort.
Homes were being built through federal agencies such as
the newly formed Federal Housing Administration,
formed in 1934 and transferred to HUD in 1965.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau (USCB) [7], in the
years since World War II, the types of homes Americans
live in have changed dramatically. In 1940, most homes
were considered attached houses (row houses, town-
houses, and duplexes). Small apartment houses with two

Chapter 1: Housing History and Purpose 1-5



Page 410: to four apartments had their zenith in the 1950s. In the
1960 census, two-thirds of the housing inventory was
made up of one-family detached houses, which declined
to less than 60% in the 1990 census.

The postwar years saw the expansion of suburban hous-
ing led by William J. Levitt’s Levittown, on Long Island,
which had a strong influence on postwar building and
initiated the subdivisions and tract houses of the follow-
ing decades (Figure 1.2). The 1950s and 1960s saw con-
tinued suburban development, with the growing ease of
transportation marked by the expansion of the interstate
highway system. As the cost of housing began to increase
as a result of increased demand, a grassroots movement to
provide adequate housing for the poor began to emerge.
According to Wright [5], in the 1970s only about 25% of
the population could afford a $35,000 home. According
to Gaillard [8], Koinonia Partners, a religious organiza-
tion founded in 1942 by Clarence Jordan near Albany,
Georgia, was the seed for Habitat for Humanity. Habitat
for Humanity, founded in 1976 by Millard Fuller, is
known for its international efforts and has constructed
more than 150,000 houses in 80 countries; 50,000 of
these houses are in the United States. The homes are
energy-efficient and environmentally friendly to conserve
resources and reduce long-term costs to the homeowners.

Builders also began promoting one-floor minihomes and
no-frills homes of approximately 900 to 1,200 square
feet. Manufactured housing began to increase in popular-
ity, with mobile home manufacturers becoming some of
the most profitable corporations in the United States in
the early 1970s. In the 1940 census, manufactured hous-
ing were lumped into the “other” category with boats and

Figure 1.2. Levittown, New York

1-6 Chapter 1: Housing History and Purpose

tourist cabins: by the 1990 census, manufactured housing
made up 7% of the total housing inventory. Many com-
munities ban manufactured housing from residential

neighborhoods.

According to Hart et al. [9], nearly 30% of all home sales
nationwide are of manufactured housing, and more than
90% of those homes are never moved once they are
anchored. According to a 2001 industry report, the
demand for prefabricated housing is expected to increase
in excess of 3% annually to $20 billion in 2005, with
most units being manufactured homes. The largest mar-
ket is expected to continue in the southern part of the
United States, with the most rapid growth occurring in
the western part of the country. As of 2000, five manu-
factured-home producers, representing 35% of the mar-
ket, dominated the industry. This industry, over the past
20 to 25 years, has been affected by two pieces of federal
legislation. The first, the Mobile Home Construction and
Safety Standards Act, adopted by HUD in 1974, was
passed to aid consumers through regulation and enforce-
ment of HUD design and construction standards for
manufactured homes. The second, the 1980 Housing
Act, required the federal government to change the term
“mobile home” to “manufactured housing” in all federal
laws and literature. One of the prime reasons for this
change was that these homes were in reality no longer
mobile in the true sense.

The energy crisis in the United States between 1973 and
1974 had a major effect on the way Americans lived,
drove, and built their homes. The high cost of both heat-
ing and cooling homes required action, and some of the
action taken was ill advised or failed to consider healthy
housing concerns. Sealing homes and using untried insu-
lation materials and other energy conservation actions
often resulted in major and sometimes dangerous build-
ups of indoor air pollutants. These buildups of toxins
occurred both in homes and offices. Sealing buildings for
energy efficiency and using off-gassing building materials
containing urea-formaldehyde, vinyl, and other new plas-
tic surfaces, new glues, and even wallpapers created toxic
environments. These newly sealed environments were not
refreshed with makeup air and resulted in the accumula-
tion of both chemical and biologic pollutants and mois-
ture leading to mold growth, representing new threats to
both short-term and long-term health. The results of
these actions are still being dealt with today.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 411: References

1. Schoenauer N. 6,000 years of housing. New York/
London: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.; 2000.

2. Chadwick E. Report on an enquiry into the sanitary
condition of the labouring population of Great Britain
and on the means of its improvements. London: Clowes
and Sons; 1842.

3. Shattuck L, Banks N Jr, Abbot J. Report of the Sanitary
Commission of Massachusetts, 1850. Boston: Dutton and
Wentworth; 1850. Available from URL: http://www.
deltaomega.org/shattuck.pdf

4. Griscom JH. The sanitary condition of the labouring
population of New York. New York: Harper; 1845.

5. Wright G. Building the dream—a social history of
housing in America. Cambridge, MA/London: The MIT
Press; 1998.

6. Von Hoffman A. The origins of American housing
reform. Cambridge, MA: Joint Center for Housing
Studies—Harvard University; August 1998. p. W98-2.

7. US Census Bureau. Historical census of housing tables—
units in structure; 2002. Washington, DC: US Census
Bureau; 2002. Available from URL:
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/census/
historic/units.huml.

8. Gaillard E If] were a carpenter, twenty years of Habitat
for Humanity. Winston-Salem, NC: John E. Blair; 1996.

9. Hart JE Rhodes MJ, Morgan JT, Lindberg MB. The
unknown world of the mobile home. Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press; 2002.

Additional Sources of Information

Dolkart A. The 1901 Tenement House Act: chapter 6,
cleaning up the toilets. New York: Lower East Side
Tenement Museum; no date. Available from URL:
http://www.tenement.org/ features_dolkart7.html.

Hale EE. Workingmen’s homes, essays and stories, on the
homes of men who work in large towns. Boston: James

R. Osgood and Company; 1874.

History of plumbing in America. Plumbing and
Mechanical Magazine. 1987 Jul. Available from URL:
http://www.plumbingsupply.com/pmamerica.html.

Housing Act of 1949, The US Committee on Agriculture
Glossary.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Lang RE, Sohmer RR. Editors’ introduction, legacy of
the Housing Act of 1949: the past, present, and future of
federal housing and urban policy. Housing Policy Debate
2000; 11(2) 291-8. Available from URL:
http://www.fanniemaefoundation.org/ programs/hpd/
v11i2-edintro.shtml.

Mason JB. History of housing in the US. 1930-1980.
Houston, TX: Gulf Publishing Company; 1982.

Passic F. Urban renewal. Morning Star [Albion,
Michigan]. 1997 Feb 13; 6. Available from URL:
http://www.albionmich.com/ history/histor_note-

book/940213.shtml.

Red-lining [definition of], 535A.1 Definitions, Iowa
Code 2001: Section 535A.1. Des Moines, IA: The Iowa
Legislature. Available from URL: http://www.legis.state.
ia.us/IACODE/ 2001/535A/1.html.

Rental Housing On Line. Federal housing acts. Port
Huron, MI: Rental Housing On Line; no date. Available
from URL: http://www.rhol.org/rental/fedact.htm.

Rental Housing On Line. Government’ role in low
income housing. Port Huron, MI: Rental Housing On
Line; no date. Available from URL: http://www.rhol.org/
rental/housing.htm.

Texas Low Income Housing Information Service. The
past: special interests, race, and local control; Housing
Act of 1949: bipartisan support for public housing.
Austin, TX: Texas Low Income Housing Information
Service; no date. Available from URL: http://www.texas-
housing.org/txlihis/ phdebate/past12.html.

US Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Fair housing laws and presidential Executive Orders.
Washington, DC: US Department of Housing and

Urban Development; no date. Available from URL:
http://www.hud.gov/ offices/ fheo/ FHLaws/index.cfm.

US Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Homes and communities. Washington, DC: US
Department of Housing and Urban Development; no
date. Available from URL: http://www.hud.gov.

Warth G. Research project looking at red-lining. North
County [California] Times 2002 May 5. Available from
URL: http://www.nctimes.com/ articles/2002/05/05/

export8963.txt.

Chapter 1: Housing History and Purpose 1-7



Page 412: 1-8 Chapter 1: Housing History and Purpose Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 413: Chapter 2: Basic Principles of Healthy Housing

“The connection between health and dwelling is one of the
most important that exists.”

Florence Nightingale

Introduction

It seems obvious that health is related to where people
live. People spend 50% or more of every day inside their
homes. Consequently, it makes sense that the housing
environment constitutes one of the major influences on
health and well-being. Many of the basic principles of the
link between housing and health were elucidated more
than 60 years ago by the American Public Health
Association (APHA) Committee on the Hygiene of
Housing. After World War II, political scientists, sociolo-
gists, and others became interested in the relation
between housing and health, mostly as an outgrowth of a
concern over poor housing conditions resulting from the
massive influx into American cities of veterans looking for
jobs. Now, at the beginning of the 21st century, there is a
growing awareness that health is linked not only to the
physical structure of a housing unit, but also to the
neighborhood and community in which the house is
located.

According to Ehlers and Steel [1], in 1938, a Committee
on the Hygiene of Housing, appointed by APHA, created
the Basic Principles of Healthful Housing, which pro-
vided guidance regarding the fundamental needs of
humans as they relate to housing. These fundamental
needs include physiologic and psychologic needs, protec-
tion against disease, protection against injury, protection
against fire and electrical shock, and protection against
toxic and explosive gases.

Fundamental Physiologic Needs

Housing should provide for the following physiologic
needs:

1. protection from the elements,
2. athermal environment that will avoid undue heat loss,

3. athermal environment that will permit adequate heat loss

from the body,
4. an atmosphere of reasonable chemical purity,

5. adequate daylight illumination and avoidance of undue

daylight glare,

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

6. direct sunlight,

7. adequate artificial illumination and avoidance of glare,
8. protection from excessive noise, and

9. adequate space for exercise and for children to play.

The first three physiologic needs reflect the requirement
for adequate protection from the elements. The lack of
adequate heating and cooling systems in homes can con-
tribute to respiratory illnesses or even lead to death from
extreme temperatures. According to the National Weather
Service, 98 people died from extreme temperatures in
1996; 62 of these were due to extreme cold. Hypothermia
occurs when the body temperature drops below 96°F
(46°C). It can occur in any person exposed to severe cold
without enough protection. Older people are particularly
susceptible because they may not notice the cold as easily
and can develop hypothermia even after exposure to mild
cold. Susceptibility to the cold can be exacerbated by cer-
tain medications, medical conditions, or the consumption
of alcohol. Hyperthermia is the name given to a variety of
heat-related illnesses. The two most common forms of
hyperthermia are heat exhaustion and heat stroke. Of the
two, heat stroke is especially dangerous and requires
immediate medical attention.

According to the National Institute on Aging (NIA) [2],
lifestyle factors can increase the risk for hyperthermia:

Unbearably hot living quarters. This would include peo-
ple who live in homes without fans or air conditioners. To
help avert the problem, residents should open windows at
night; create cross-ventilation by opening windows on two
sides of the building; cover windows when they are
exposed to direct sunlight and keep curtains, shades, or
blinds drawn during the hottest part of the day.

Lack of transportation. People without fans or air condi-
tioners often are unable to go to shopping malls, movie
theaters, and libraries to cool off because of illness or the
lack of transportation.

Inadequate or inoperable windows. Society has become
so reliant on climate control systems that when they fail,
windows cannot be opened. As was the case in the 2003
heat wave in France, many homes worldwide do not even
have fans for cooling.

Overdressing. Older people, because they may not feel
the heat, may not dress appropriately in hot weather.

Chapter 2: Basic Principles of Healthy Housing 2-1



Page 414: Visiting overcrowded places. Trips should be scheduled
during nonrush-hour times and participation in special
events should be carefully planned to avoid disease
transmission.

Not checking weather conditions. Older people, partic-
ularly those at special risk, should stay indoors on espe-
cially hot and humid days, particularly when an air
pollution alert is in effect.

USCB [3] reported that about 75% of homes in the
United States used either utility gas or electricity for heat-
ing purposes, with utility gas accounting for about 50%.
This, of course, varies with the region of the country,
depending on the availability of hydroelectric power. This
compares with the 1940 census, which found that three-
quarters of all households heated with coal or wood.
Electric heat was so rare that it was not even an option on
the census form of 1940. Today, coal has virtually disap-
peared as a household fuel. Wood all but disappeared as a
heating fuel in 1970, but made a modest comeback at
4% nationally by 1990. This move over time to more
flexible fuels allows a majority of today’s homes to main-
tain healthy temperatures, although many houses still lack
adequate insulation.

The fifth through the seventh physiologic concerns
address adequate illumination, both natural and artificial.
Research has revealed a strong relationship between light
and human physiology. The effects of light on both the
human eye and human skin are notable. According to
Zilber [4], one of the physiologic responses of the skin to
sunlight is the production of vitamin D. Light allows us
to see. It also affects body rhythms and psychologic
health. Average individuals are affected daily by both nat-
ural and artificial lighting levels in their homes. Adequate
lighting is important in allowing people to see unsanitary
conditions and to prevent injury, thus contributing to a
healthier and safer environment. Improper indoor light-
ing can also contribute to eyestrain from inadequate illu-
mination, glare, and flicker.

Avoiding excessive noise (eighth physiologic concern) is
important in the 21st century. However, the concept of
noise pollution is not new. Two thousand years ago, Julius
Caesar banned chariots from traveling the streets of Rome
late at night. In the 19th century, numerous towns and
cities prohibited ringing church bells. In the early 20th
century, London prohibited church bells from ringing
between 9:00 PM and 9:00 AM. In 1929, New York City
formed a Noise Abatement Commission that was charged
with evaluating noise issues and suggesting solutions. At

2-2 Chapter 2: Basic Principles of Healthy Housing

that time, it was concluded that loud noise affected
health and productivity. In 1930, this same commission
determined that constant exposure to loud noises could
affect worker efficiency and long-term hearing levels. In
1974, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
produced a document titled Information on Levels of
Environmental Noise Requisite to Protect Public Health and
Welfare With an Adequate Margin of Safety [5]. This docu-
ment identified maximum levels of 55 decibels outdoors
and 45 decibels indoors to prevent interference with
activities and 70 decibels for all areas to prevent hearing
loss. In 1990, the United Kingdom implemented The
Household Appliances (Noise Emission) Regulations [6]
to help control indoor noise from modern appliances.
Noise has physiologic impacts aside from the potential to
reduce hearing ability. According to the American
Speech-Language-Hearing Association [7], these effects
include elevated blood pressure; negative cardiovascular
effects; increased breathing rates, digestion, and stomach
disturbances; ulcers; negative effects on developing
fetuses; difficulty sleeping after the noise stops; plus the
intensification of the effects of drugs, alcohol, aging, and
carbon monoxide. In addition, noise can reduce attention
to tasks and impede speech communication. Finally, noise
can hamper performance of daily tasks, increase fatigue,
and cause irritability.

Household noise can be controlled in various ways.
Approaching the problem during initial construction is
the simplest, but has not become popular. For example,
in early 2003, only about 30% of homebuilders offered
sound-attenuating blankets for interior walls. A sound-
attenuating blanket is a lining of noise abatement prod-
ucts (the thickness depends on the material being used).
Spray-in-place soft foam insulation can also be used as a
sound dampener, as can special walking mats for floors.
Actions that can help reduce household noise include
installing new, quieter appliances and isolating washing
machines to reduce noise and water passing through
pipes.

The ninth and final physiologic need is for adequate
space for exercise and play. Before industrialization in the
United States and England, a preponderance of the popu-
lation lived and worked in more rural areas with very
adequate areas for exercise and play. As industrialization
impacted demographics, more people were in cities with-
out ample space for play and exercise. In the 19th cen-
tury, society responded with the development of
playgrounds and public parks. Healthful housing should

include the provision of safe play and exercise areas.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 415: Many American neighborhoods are severely deficient,
with no area for children to safely play. New residential
areas often do not have sidewalks or street lighting, nor
are essential services available by foot because of highway
and road configurations.

Fundamental Psychologic Needs

Seven fundamental psychologic needs for healthy housing
include the following:

1. adequate privacy for the individual,

2. opportunities for normal family life,

3. opportunities for normal community life,
4

facilities that make possible the performance of household
tasks without undue physical and mental fatigue,

5. facilities for maintenance of cleanliness of the dwelling and
of the person,

6. possibilities for aesthetic satisfaction in the home and its
surroundings, and

7. concordance with prevailing social standards of the local

community.

Privacy is a necessity to most people, to some degree and
during some periods. The increase in house size and the
diminishing family size have, in many instances, increased
the availability of privacy. Ideally, everyone would have
their own rooms, or, if that were not possible, would
share a bedroom with only one person of the same sex,
excepting married couples and small children.
Psychiatrists consider it important for children older than
2 years to have bedrooms separate from their parents. In
addition, bedrooms and bathrooms should be accessible
directly from halls or living rooms and not through other
bedrooms. In addition to the psychologic value of pri-
vacy, repeated studies have shown that lack of space and
quiet due to crowding can lead to poor school perfor-
mance in children.

Coupled with a natural desire for privacy is the social
desire for normal family and community life. A whole-
some atmosphere requires adequate living room space and
adequate space for withdrawal elsewhere during periods
of entertainment. This accessibility expands beyond the
walls of the home and includes easy communication with
centers of culture and business, such as schools, churches,
entertainment, shopping, libraries, and medical services.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Protection Against Disease

Eight ways to protect against contaminants include the
following:

1. provide a safe and sanitary water supply;
2. protect the water supply system against pollution;

3. provide toilet facilities that minimize the danger of
transmitting disease;

4. protect against sewage contamination of the interior
surfaces of the dwelling;

5. avoid unsanitary conditions near the dwelling;

6. exclude vermin from the dwelling, which may play a part
in transmitting disease;

7. provide facilities for keeping milk and food fresh; and

8. allow sufficient space in sleeping rooms to minimize the
danger of contact infection.

According to the U.S. EPA [8], there are approximately
160,000 public or community drinking water systems in
the United States. The current estimate is that 42 million
Americans (mostly in rural America) get their water from
private wells or other small, unregulated water systems.
The presence of adequate water, sewer, and plumbing
facilities is central to the prevention, reduction, and pos-
sible elimination of water-related diseases. According to
the Population Information Program [9], water-related
diseases can be organized into four categories:

* waterborne diseases, including those caused by both
fecal-oral organisms and those caused by toxic
substances;

* water-based diseases;
© water-related vector diseases; and
* water-scarce diseases.

Numerous studies link improvements in sanitation and
the provision of potable water with significant reductions
in morbidity and mortality from water-related diseases.
Clean water and sanitation facilities have proven to reduce
infant and child mortality by as much as 55% in Third
World countries according to studies from the 1980s.
Waterborne diseases are often referred to as “dirty-water”
diseases and are the result of contamination from chemi-
cal, human, and animal wastes. Specific diseases in this
group include cholera, typhoid, shigella, polio, meningi-
tis, and hepatitis A and E. Water-based diseases are caused
by aquatic organisms that spend part of their life cycle in
the water and another part as parasites of animals.

Chapter 2: Basic Principles of Healthy Housing 2-3



Page 416: Although rare in the United States, these diseases include
dracunculiasis, paragonimiasis, clonorchiasis, and schisto-
somiasis. The reduction in these diseases in many coun-
tries has not only led to decreased rates of illness and
death, but has also increased productivity through a
reduction in days lost from work.

Water-related diseases are linked to vectors that breed and
live in or near polluted and unpolluted water. These vec-
tors are primarily mosquitoes that infect people with the
disease agents for malaria, yellow fever, dengue fever, and
filariasis. While the control of vectorborne diseases is a
complex matter, in the United States, most of the control
focus has been on controlling habitat and breeding areas
for the vectors and reducing and controlling human cases
of the disease that can serve as hosts for the vector.
Vectorborne diseases have recently become a more of a
concern to the United States with the importation of the
West Nile virus. The transmission of West Nile virus
occurs when a mosquito vector takes a blood meal from a
bird or incidental hosts, such as a dog, cat, horse, or other
vertebrate. The human cases of West Nile virus in 2003
numbered 9,862, with 264 deaths. Finally, water-scarce
diseases are diseases that flourish where sanitation is poor
due to a scarcity of fresh water. Diseases included in this
category are diphtheria, leprosy, whooping cough, teta-
nus, tuberculosis, and trachoma. These diseases are often
transmitted when the supply of fresh water is inadequate
for hand washing and basic hygiene. These conditions are
still rampant in much of the world, but are essentially
absent from the United States due to the extensive avail-
ability of potable drinking water.

In 2000, USCB [10] reported that 1.4% of U.S. homes
lacked plumbing facilities. This differs greatly from the
1940 census, when nearly one-half of U.S. homes lacked
complete plumbing. The proportion has continually
dropped, falling to about one-third in 1950 and then to
one-sixth in 1960. Complete plumbing facilities are
defined as hot and cold piped water, a bathtub or shower,
and a flush toilet. The containment of household sewage
is instrumental in protecting the public from waterborne
and vectorborne diseases. The 1940 census revealed that
more than a third of U.S. homes had no flush toilet, with
70% of the homes in some states without a flush toilet.
Of the 13 million housing units at the time without flush
toilets, 11.8 million (90.7%) had an outside toilet or
privy, another 1 million (7.6%) had no toilet or privy,
and the remainder had a nonflush toilet in the structure.

In contrast to these figures, the 2000 census data demon-
strate the great progress that has been made in providing
sanitary sewer facilities. Nationally, 74.8% of homes are

2-4 Chapter 2: Basic Principles of Healthy Housing

served by a public sewer, with 24.1% served by a septic
tank or cesspool, and the remaining 1.1% using other
means.

Vermin, such as rodents, have long been linked to prop-
erty destruction and disease. Integrated pest management,
along with proper housing construction, has played a sig-
nificant role in reducing vermin around the modern
home. Proper food storage, rat-proofing construction,
and ensuring good sanitation outside the home have
served to eliminate or reduce rodent problems in the 21st
century home.

Facilities to properly store milk and food have not only
been instrumental in reducing the incidence of some
foodborne diseases, but have also significantly changed
the diet in developed countries. Refrigeration can be
traced to the ancient Chinese, Hebrews, Greeks, and
Romans. In the last 150 years, great strides have been
made in using refrigeration to preserve and cool food.
Vapor compression using air and, subsequently, ammonia
as a coolant was first developed in the 1850s. In the early
1800s, natural ice was extracted for use as a coolant and
preserver of food. By the late 1870s, there were 35 com-
mercial ice plants in the United States and, by 1909,
there were 2,000. However, as early as the 1890s, sources
of natural ice began to be a problem as a result of pollu-
tion and sewage dumped into bodies of water. Thus, the
use of natural ice as a refrigerant began to present a
health problem. Mechanical manufacture of ice provided
a temporary solution, which eventually resulted in pro-
viding mechanical refrigeration.

Refrigeration was first used by the brewing and meat-
packing industries; but most households had iceboxes
(Figure 2.1), which made the ice wagon a popular icon of
the late 1800s and early 1900s. In 1915, the first refriger-
ator, the Guardian, was introduced. This unit was the
predecessor of the Frigidaire. The refrigerator became as
necessary to the household as a stove or sewing machine.
By 1937, nearly 6 million refrigerators were manufac-
tured in the United States. By 1950, in excess of 80% of
American farms and more than 90% of urban homes had
a refrigerator.

Adequate living and sleeping space are also important in
protecting against contagion. It is an issue not only of
privacy but of adequate room to reduce the potential for
the transmission of contagion. Much improvement has
been made in the adequacy of living space for the U.S.
family over the last 30 years. According to USCB [11],
the average size of new single homes has increased from a
1970 average of 1,500 square feet to a 2000 average of

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 417: Figure 2.1. Circa 1890 Icebox
Source: Robert R. McCormick Museum, Wheaton, Illinois

2,266 square feet. USCB [11] says that slightly less than
5% of U.S. homes were considered crowded in 1990;
that is, they had more than one person per room.
However, this is an increase since the 1980 census, when
the figure was 4.5%. This is the only time there has been
an increase since the first housing census was initiated in
1940, when one in five homes was crowded. During the
1940 census, most crowded homes were found in south-
ern states, primarily in the rural south. Crowding has
become common in a few large urban areas, with more
than one-fourth of all crowded units located in four met-
ropolitan areas: Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, and New
York. The rate for California has not changed signifi-
cantly between 1940 (13%) and 1990 (12%). Excessive
crowding in homes has the potential to increase not only
communicable disease transmission, but also the stress
level of occupants because modern urban individuals
spend considerably more time indoors than did their
1940s counterparts.

Protection Against Injury

A major provision for safe housing construction is devel-
oping and implementing building codes. According to
the International Code Council one- and two-family
dwelling code, the purpose of building codes is to pro-
vide minimum standards for the protection of life, limb,
property, environment, and for the safety and welfare of

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

the consumer, general public, and the owners and occu-
pants of residential buildings regulated by this code [12].

However, as with all types of codes, the development of
innovative processes and products must be allowed to take
a place in improving construction technology. Thus,
according to the International Code Council one- and
two-family dwelling code, building codes are not intended
to limit the appropriate use of materials, appliances,
equipment, or methods by design or construction that are
not specifically prescribed by the code if the building offi-
cial determines that the proposed alternate materials,
appliances, equipment or methods of design or construc-
tion are at least equivalent of that prescribed in this code.
While the details of what a code should include are
beyond the scope of this section, additional information
can be found at http://www.iccsafe.org/, the Web site of
the International Code Council (ICC). ICC is an organi-
zation formed by the consolidation of the Building
Officials and Code Administrators International,
Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., and
the International Conference of Building Officials [12].

According to the Home Safety Council (HSC) [13], the
leading causes of home injury deaths in 1998 were falls
and poisonings, which accounted for 6,756 and 5,758
deaths, respectively. As expected, the rates and national
estimates of the number of fall deaths were highest among
those older than 64 years, and stairs or steps were associ-
ated with 17% of fall deaths. Overall, falls were the lead-
ing cause of nonfatal, unintentional injuries occurring at
home and accounted for 5.6 million injuries. Similar to
the mortality statistics, consumer products most often
associated with emergency department visits included
stairs and steps, accounting for 854,631 visits, and floors,
accounting for 556,800 visits. A national survey by HSC
found that one-third of all households with stairs did not
have banisters or handrails on at least one set of stairs.
Related to this, homes with older persons were more
likely to have banisters or handrails than were those where
young children live or visit. The survey also revealed that
48% of households have windows on the second floor or
above, but only 25% have window locks or bars to pre-
vent children from falling out. Bathtub mats or nonskid
strips to reduce bathtub falls were used in 63% of
American households. However, in senior households (age
70 years and older), 79% used mats or nonskid strips.
Nineteen percent of the total number of homes surveyed
had grab bars to supplement the mats and strips.
Significantly, only 39% of the group most susceptible to
falls (people aged 70 years and older) used both nonskid
surfaces and grab bars.

Chapter 2: Basic Principles of Healthy Housing 2-5



Page 418: Protection Against Fire

An important component of safe housing is to control
conditions that promote the initiation and spread of fire.
Between 1992 and 2001, an average of 4,266 Americans
died annually in fires and nearly 25,000 were injured.
This fact and the following information from the United
States Fire Administration (USFA) [14] demonstrate the
impact that fire safety and the lack of it have in the
United States. The United States has one of the highest
fire death rates in the industrialized world, with 13.4
deaths per million people. At least 80% of all fire deaths
occur in residences. Residential fires account for 23% of
all fires and 76% of structure fires. In one- and two-fam-
ily dwellings, fires start in the kitchen 25.5% of the time
and originate in the bedroom 13.7% of the time.
Apartment fires most often start in the kitchen, but at
almost twice the rate (48.5%), with bedrooms again
being the second most common place at 13.4%.

These USFA statistics also disclose that cooking is the
leading cause of home fires, usually a result of unattended
cooking and human error rather than mechanical failure
of the cooking units. The leading cause of fire deaths in
homes is careless smoking, which can be significantly
deterred by smoke alarms and smolder-resistant bedding
and upholstered furniture. Heating system fires tend to
be a larger problem in single-family homes than in apart-
ments because the heating systems in family homes fre-
quently are not professionally maintained.

A number of conditions in the household can contribute
to the creation or spread of fire. The USFA data indicate
that more than one-third of rural Americans use fire-
places, wood stoves, and other fuel-fired appliances as pri-
mary sources of heat. These same systems account for
36% of rural residential fires. Many of these fires are the
result of creosote buildup in chimneys and stovepipes.
These fires could be avoided by

* inspecting and cleaning by a certified chimney
specialist;
* clearing the area around the hearth of debris,

decorations, and flammable materials;

* using a metal mesh screen with fireplaces and leaving
glass doors open while burning a fire;

* installing stovepipe thermometers to monitor flue
temperatures;

* leaving air inlets on wood stoves open and never
restricting air supply to the fireplaces, thus helping to
reduce creosote buildup;

2-6 Chapter 2: Basic Principles of Healthy Housing

* using fire-resistant materials on walls around wood
stoves;

* never using flammable liquids to start a fire;

* using only seasoned hardwood rather than soft, moist
wood, which accelerates creosote buildup;

° building small fires that burn completely and produce
less smoke;

* never burning trash, debris, or pasteboard in a fireplace;

° placing logs in the rear of the fireplace on an adequate
supporting grate;

° never leaving a fire in the fireplace unattended;

° keeping the roof clear of leaves, pine needles, and other

debris;

* covering the chimney with a mesh screen spark arrester;
and

* removing branches hanging above the chimney, flues,
or vents.

USFA [14] also notes that manufactured homes can be
susceptible to fires. More than one-fifth of residential fires
in these facilities are related to the use of supplemental
room heaters, such as wood- and coal-burning stoves,
kerosene heaters, gas space-heaters, and electrical heaters.
Most fires related to supplemental heating equipment
result from improper installation, maintenance, or use of
the appliance. USFA recommendations to reduce the
chance of fire with these types of appliances include the
following:

* placing wood stoves on noncombustible surfaces or a
code-specified or listed floor surface;

* placing noncombustible materials around the opening
and hearth of fireplaces;

¢ placing space heaters on firm, out-of-the-way surfaces
to reduce tipping over and subsequent spillage of fuel
and providing at least 3 feet of air space between the
heating device and walls, chairs, firewood, and curtains;

° placing vents and chimneys to allow 18 inches of air
space between single-wall connector pipes and
combustibles and 2 inches between insulated chimneys
and combustibles; and

* using only the fuel designated by the manufacturer for
the appliance.

The ability to escape from a building when fire has been
discovered or detected is of extreme importance. In the

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 419: modern home, three key elements can contribute to a safe
exit from a home during the threat of fire. The first of
these is a working smoke alarm system. The average
homeowner in the 1960s had never heard of a smoke
alarm, but by the mid-1980s, laws in 38 states and in
thousands of municipalities required smoke alarms in all
new and existing residences. By 1995, 93% of all single-
family and multifamily homes, apartments, nursing
homes, and dormitories were equipped with alarms. The
cost decreased from $1,000 for a professionally installed
unit for a three-bedroom home in the 1970s to an owner-
installed $10 unit. According to the EPA [15], ionization
chamber and photoelectric are the two most common
smoke detectors available commercially. Helmenstein [16]
states that a smoke alarm uses one or both methods, and
occasionally uses a heat detector, to warn of a fire. These
units can be powered by a 9-volt battery, a lithium bat-
tery, or 120-volt house wiring. Ionization detectors func-
tion using an ionization chamber and a minute source of
ionizing radiation. The radiation source is americium-241
(perhaps 1/5,000th of a gram), while the ionization
chamber consists of two plates separated by about a centi-
meter. The power source (battery or house current)
applies voltage to the plates, resulting in one plate being
charged positively while the other plate is charged nega-
tively. The americium constantly releases alpha particles
that knock electrons off the atoms in the air, ionizing the
oxygen and nitrogen atoms in the chamber. The negative
plate attracts the positively charged oxygen and nitrogen
atoms, while the electrons are attracted to the positive
plate, generating a small, continuous electric current. If
smoke enters the ionization chamber, the smoke particles
attach to the ions and neutralize them, so they do not
reach the plate. The alarm is then triggered by the drop
in current between the plates [16].

Photoelectric devices function in one of two ways. First,
smoke blocks a light beam, reducing the light reaching
the photocell, which sets off the alarm. In the second and
more common type of photoelectric unit, smoke particles
scatter the light onto a photocell, initiating an alarm.
Both detector types are effective smoke sensors and both
must pass the same test to be certified as Underwriters
Laboratories (UL) smoke detectors. Ionization detectors
respond more quickly to flaming fires with smaller com-
bustion particles, while photoelectric detectors respond
more quickly to smoldering fires. Detectors can be dam-
aged by steam or high temperatures. Photoelectric detec-
tors are more expensive than ionization detectors and are
more sensitive to minute smoke particles. However, ion-
ization detectors have a degree of built-in security not

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

inherent to photoelectric detectors. When the battery
starts to fail in an ionization detector, the ion current falls
and the alarm sounds, warning that it is time to change
the battery before the detector becomes ineffective.
Backup batteries may be used for photoelectric detectors
that are operated using the home’s electrical system.

According to USFA [14], a properly functioning smoke

alarm diminishes the risk for dying in a fire by approxi-

mately 50% and is considered the single most important
means of preventing house and apartment fire fatalities.

Proper installation and maintenance, however, are key to
their usefulness. Figure 2.2 shows a typical smoke alarm
being tested.

Following are key issues regarding installation and main-
tenance of smoke alarms. (Smoke alarms should be
installed on every level of the home including the base-
ment, both inside and outside the sleeping area.)

¢ Smoke alarms should be installed on the ceiling or
6-8 inches below the ceiling on side walls.

¢ Battery replacement is imperative to ensuring proper
operation. Typically, batteries should be replaced at
least once a year, although some units are
manufactured with a 10-year battery. A “chirping”
noise from the unit indicates the need for battery
replacement. A battery-operated smoke alarm has a life
expectancy of 8 to 10 years.

¢ Battery replacement is not necessary in units that are
connected to the household electrical system.

¢ Regardless of the type, it is crucial to test every smoke
alarm monthly. Data from HSC [13] revealed that
only 83% of individuals with fire alarms test them at
least once a year; while only 19% of households with
at least one smoke alarm test them quarterly.

A second element impacting escape from a building is a
properly installed fire-suppression system. According to
USFA [14], sprinkler systems began to be used over 100
years ago in New England textile mills. Currently, few
homes are protected by residential sprinkler systems.
However, UL-listed home systems are available and are
designed to protect homes much faster than standard
commercial or industrial sprinklers. Based on approxi-
mately 1% of the total building price in new construc-
tion, sprinkler systems can be installed for a reasonable
price. These systems can be retrofitted to existing con-
struction and are smaller than commercial systems. In
addition, homeowner insurance discounts for such sys-
tems range between 5% and 15% and are increasing in

availability.

Chapter 2: Basic Principles of Healthy Housing 2-7



Page 420: Figure 2.2. Smoke Alarm Testing
Source: Federal Emergency Management Agency

The final element in escaping from a residential fire is
having a fire plan. A 1999 survey conducted by USFA
[14] found that 60% of Americans have an escape plan,
with 42% of these individuals having practiced the plan.
Surprisingly, 26% of Americans stated they had never
thought about practicing an escape plan, and 3% believed
escape planning to be unnecessary. In addition, of the
people who had a smoke alarm sound an alert over the
past year before the study, only 8% believed it to be a fire
and thought they should evacuate the building.

Protection from electrical shocks and burns is also a vital
element in the overall safety of the home. According to
the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) [17],
electrical distribution equipment was the third-leading
cause of home fires and the second-leading cause of fire
deaths in the United States between 1994 and 1998.
Specifically, NFPA reported that 38,300 home electrical
fires occurred in 1998, which resulted in 284 deaths,
1,184 injuries, and approximately $670 million in direct
property damage. The same report indicated that the
leading cause of electrical distribution fires was ground
fault or short-circuit problems. A third of the home elec-
trical distribution fires were a result of problems with
fixed wiring, while cords and plugs were responsible for
17% of these fires and 28% of the deaths.

Additional investigation of these statistics reveals that
electrical fires are one of the leading types of home fires
in manufactured homes. USFA [14] data demonstrate
that many electrical fires in homes are associated with
improper installation of electrical devices by do-it-your-

2-8 Chapter 2: Basic Principles of Healthy Housing

selfers. Errors attributed to this amateur electrical work
include use of improperly rated devices such as switches
or receptacles and loose connections leading to overheat-
ing and arcing, resulting in fires. Recommendations to
reduce the risk of electrical fires and electrocution include
the following:

1. Use only the correct fuse size and do not use pennies

behind a fuse.

2. Install ground fault circuit interrupters (GFCI) on all
outlets in kitchens, bathrooms, and anywhere else near
water. This can also be accomplished by installing a GFCI
in the breaker box, thus protecting an entire circuit.

3. Never place combustible materials near light fixtures,
especially halogen bulbs that get very hot.

4. Use only the correct bulb size in a light fixture.

Use only properly rated extension cords for the job

needed.

6. Never use extension cords as a long-term solution to the
need for an additional outlet. Size the extension cord to
the wattage to be used.

7. Never run extension cords inside walls or under rugs
because they generate heat that must be able to dissipate.

Fire Extinguishers

A fire extinguisher should be listed and labeled by an
independent testing laboratory such as FM (Factory
Mutual) or UL. Fire extinguishers are labeled according
to the type of fire on which they may be used. Fires
involving wood or cloth, flammable liquids, electrical, or
metal sources react differently to extinguishers. Using the
wrong type of extinguisher on a fire could be dangerous
and could worsen the fire. Traditionally, the labels A, B,
C, and D have been used to indicate the type of fire on
which an extinguisher is to be used.

Type A— Used for ordinary combustibles such as cloth,
wood, rubber, and many plastics. These types of fire usu-
ally leave ashes after they burn: Type A extinguishers for
ashes. The Type A label is in a triangle on the
extinguisher.

Type B— Used for flammable liquid fires such as oil, gas-
oline, paints, lacquers, grease, and solvents. These sub-
stances often come in barrels: Type B extinguishers for
barrels. The Type B label is in a square on the
extinguisher.

Type C—Used for electrical fires such as in wiring, fuse
boxes, energized electrical equipment, and other electrical

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 421: sources. Electricity travels in currents; Type C extinguish-
ers for currents. The Type C label is in a circle on the
extinguisher.

Type D—Used for metal fires such as magnesium, tita-
nium, and sodium. These types of fires are very danger-
ous and seldom handled by the general public; Type D
means don’t get involved. The Type D label is in a star on
the extinguisher.

The higher the rating number on an A or B fire extin-
guisher, the more fire it can put out, but high-rated units
are often the heavier models. Extinguishers need care and
must be recharged after every use—a partially used unit
might as well be empty. An extinguisher should be placed
in the kitchen and in the garage or workshop. Each extin-
guisher should be installed in plain view near an escape
route and away from potential fire hazards such as heat-
ing appliances.

Recently, pictograms have come into use on fire extin-
guishers. These picture the type of fire on which an extin-
guisher is to be used. For instance, a Type A extinguisher
has a pictogram showing burning wood. A Type C extin-
guisher has a pictogram showing an electrical cord and
outlet. These pictograms are also used to show what not
to use. For example, a Type A extinguisher also show a
pictogram of an electrical cord and outlet with a slash
through it (do not use it on an electrical fire).

Fire extinguishers also have a number rating. For Type A
fires, 1 means 1% gallons of water; 2 means 2% gallons of
water, 3 means 3% gallons of water, etc. For Type B and
Type C fires, the number represents square feet. For exam-
ple, 2 equals 2 square feet, 5 equals 5 square feet, etc.

Fire extinguishers can also be made to extinguish more
than one type of fire. For example, you might have an
extinguisher with a label that reads 2A5B. This would
mean this extinguisher is good for Type A fires with a
2¥-gallon equivalence and it is also good for Type B fires
with a 5-square-foot equivalency. A good extinguisher to
have in each residential kitchen is a 2A10BC fire extin-
guisher. You might also get a Type A for the living room
and bedrooms and an ABC for the basement and garage.

PASS is a simple acronym to remind you how to operate
most fire extinguishers—pull, aim, squeeze, and sweep.
Pull the pin at the top of the cylinder. Some units require
the releasing of a lock latch or pressing a puncture lever.
Aim the nozzle at the base of the fire. Squeeze or press
the handle. Sweep the contents from side to side at the
base of the fire until it goes out. Shut off the extinguisher
and then watch carefully for any rekindling of the fire.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Protection Against Toxic Gases

Protection against gas poisoning has been a problem since
the use of fossil fuels was combined with relatively tight
housing construction. NFPA [17] notes that National
Safety Council statistics reflect unintentional poisonings
by gas or vapors, chiefly carbon monoxide (CO), num-
bering about 600 in 1998. One-fourth of these involved
heating or cooking equipment in the home. The U.S.
Consumer Product Safety Commission [18] states that in
2001 an estimated 130 deaths occurred as a result of CO
poisoning from residential sources; this decrease in deaths
is related to the increased use of CO detectors. In addi-
tion, approximately 10,000 cases of CO-related injuries
occur each year. NFPA [17] also notes that, similar to fire
deaths, unintentional CO deaths are highest for ages 4
years and under and ages 75 years and older. Additional
information about home CO monitoring can be found in

Chapter 5.

References

1. Ehlers VE, Steel EW. Municipal and rural sanitation. Sixth
edition. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company; 1965.
p. 462-4.

2. National Institute on Aging. Hyperthermia—too hot for
your health, fact sheet health information. Bethesda, MD:
US Department of Health and Human Services; no date.
Available from URL: http://www.niapublications.org/
engagepages/ hyperther.asp.

3. US Census Bureau. Historical census of housing tables—
house heating fuel. Washington, DC: US Census Bureau;
2002. Available from URL: http://www.census.gov/hhes/
www/housing/census/historic/fuels.html.

4. Zilber SA. Review of health effects of indoor lighting.

Architronic 1993;2(3). Available from URL:
hetp://architronic.saed.kent.edu/v2n3/v2n3.06.html.

5. US Environmental Protection Agency. Information on
levels of environmental noise requisite to protect public
health and welfare with an adequate margin of safety.
Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency;
1974.

6. Public Health, England and Wales. The Household.
Appliances (Noise Emission) Regulations 1990. London:
Her Majesty's Stationery Office; 1990.

7. American Speech-Language-Hearing-Association. Noise:
noise is difficult to define. Rockville, MD: American
Speech-Language-Hearing-Association; 2003. Available
from URL: http://www.asha.org/public/hearing/disorders/

noise.htm.

Chapter 2: Basic Principles of Healthy Housing 2-9



Page 422: 8. US Environmental Protection Agency. Factoids: drinking
water and ground water statistics for 2002. Washington,
DC: US Environmental Protection Agency, Office of
Ground Water and Drinking Water; January 2003.
Available from URL: http://www.epa.gov/safewater.

9. Hinrichsen D, Robey B, Upadhyay UD. The health
dimension. In: Solutions for a water-short world.
Population Report, Series M, No. 14. Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins School of Public Health, Population
Information Program; 1998. Available from URL:
hetp://www.infoforhealth.org/pr/m14/m14chap5.shtml

10. US Census Bureau. Historical census of housing tables—
plumbing facilities, 2002. Washington, DC: US Census
Bureau; 2003. Available from URL: http://www.census.
gov/hhes/www/housing/census/historic/plumbing.html.

11. US Census Bureau. Historical census of housing tables—
crowded and severely crowded housing units, 2002.
Washington, DC: US Census Bureau; 2003. Available
from URL: http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/

census/historic/crowding. html.

12. International Code Council. Fact sheet. Falls Church, VA:
International Code Council; no date. Available from
URL: http://www.iccsafe.org/news/pdf/factssheet.pdf.

13. Home Safety Council. The state of home safety in
America—executive summary. Washington, DC: The
Home Safety Council; 2002.

14. US Fire Administration. Welcome to the U.S. Fire
Administration (USFA) Web site. Washington, DC:
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Department
of Homeland Security; 2003. Available from URL:

http://www.usfa.fema.gov/.

15. US Environmental Protection Agency. Smoke detectors
and radiation. Washington, DC: US Environmental
Protection Agency; 2003. Available from URL:
http://www.epa.gov/ radiation/sources/smoke_alarm.htm.

16. Helmenstein AM. How do smoke detectors work?
Photoelectric & ionization smoke detectors, what you
need to know about chemistry. New York: About,

Inc.; 2003. Available from URL: http://chemistry.about.
com/library/weekly/aa071401a.htm.

17. National Fire Protection Association. NFPA fact sheets—
electrical safety. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection
Association; 2003. Available from URL: http://www.nfpa.
org/Research/NFPAFactSheets/Electrical/electrical.asp.

2-10 Chapter 2: Basic Principles of Healthy Housing

18. US Consumer Product Safety Commission. Nonfire
carbon monoxide deaths: 2001 annual estimate.
Washington, DC: US Consumer Product Safety
Commission; 2004. Available from URL:
hetp://www.cpsc.gov/LIBRARY/co04.pdf-

Additional Sources of Information

Barbalace RC. Environmental justice and the NIMBY
principle. Environmental Chemistry.com: Environmental,
Chemistry, and Hazardous Materials Information and
Resources. Portland, ME; no date. Available from URL:
http://environmentalchemistry.com/yogi/hazmat/
articles/nimby.html.

Bryant B. The role of SNRE in the environmental justice
movement. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan;
1997. Available from URL: http://www.umich.
edu/~snre492/ history.html.

Bullard RD. Waste and racism: a stacked deck? Forum
Appl Res Public Pol spring 1993.

National Institute on Aging. Hypothermia: a cold
weather hazard, fact sheet health information. Bethesda,
MD: US Department of Health and Human Services;
2001. Available from URL: http://www.niapublications.

org/engagepages/hypother.asp.

National Weather Service. Natural hazard statistics; no
date. Silver Spring, MD: National Weather Service.
Available from URL: http://www.nws.noaa.gov/om/haz-
stats.shtml.

US Census Bureau. New residential construction (build-
ing permits, housing starts, and housing completions).
Washington, DC: US Census Bureau; no date. Available
from URL: http://www.census.gov/newresconst.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 423: “The poorest man may in his cottage bid defiance to all the
force of the Crown. It may be frail—its roof may shake—
the wind may blow through it—the storm may enter, the
rain may enter—but the King of England cannot enter—
all his force dares not cross the threshold of the ruined
tenement!”

William Pitt, March 1763

Introduction

William Pitt, arguing before the British Parliament
against excise officers entering private homes to levy the
Cyder Tax, eloquently articulated this long-held and cher-
ished notion of the sanctity of private property. However,
a person's right to privacy is not absolute. There has
always been a tension between the rights of property own-
ers to do whatever they desire with their property and the
ability of the government to regulate uses to protect the
safety, health, and welfare of the community. Few, how-
ever, would argue with the right and duty of a city gov-
ernment to prohibit the operation of a munitions factory
or a chemical plant in the middle of a crowded residential
neighborhood.

History

The first known housing laws are in the Code of Laws of
Hammurabi [1], who was the King of Babylonia, circa
1792-1750 BC. These laws addressed the responsibility
of the home builder to construct a quality home and out-
lined the implications to the builder if injury or harm
came to the owner as a result of the failure to do so.
During the Puritan period (about 1620-1690), housing
laws essentially governed the behavior of the members of
the society. For example, no one was allowed to live
alone, so bachelors, widows, and widowers were placed
with other families as servants or boarders. In 1652,
Boston prohibited building privies within 12 feet of the
street. Around the turn of the 18th century, some New
England communities implemented local ordinances that
specified the size of houses. During the 17th century,
additional public policies on housing were established.
Because the English tradition of using wooden chimneys
and thatched roofs led to fires in many dwellings, several
colonies passed regulations prohibiting them.

After the early 17th century came an era of very rapid
metropolitan growth along the East Coast. This growth
was due largely to immigration from Europe and was
spurred by the Industrial Revolution. The most serious

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Chapter 3: Housing Regulations

housing problems began in New York about 1840 when
the first tenements were built. In 1867, a report by the
New York Metropolitan Board of Health on living condi-
tions in tenements convinced the New York State legisla-
ture to pass the Tenement Housing Act of 1867 [2]. The
principal requirements of the act included the following:

Every room occupied for sleeping, if it does not
communicate directly with the external air, must have
a ventilating or transom window of at least 3 square
feet to the neighboring room or hall.

A proper fire escape is necessary on every tenement or
lodging house.

The roof is to be kept in repair and the stairs are to
have banisters.

At least one toilet is required for every 20 occupants
for all such houses, and those toilets must be
connected to approved disposal systems.

Cleansing of every lodging house is to be to the
satisfaction of the Board of Health, which is to have
access at any time.

All cases of infectious disease are to be reported to the
Board by the owner or his agent; buildings are to be
inspected and, if necessary, disinfected or vacated if
found to be out of repair.

There were also regulations governing distances between
buildings, heights of rooms, and dimensions of windows.
Although this act had some beneficial influences on over-
crowding, sewage disposal, lighting, and ventilation, per-
haps its greatest contribution was in laying a foundation
for more stringent future legislation.

Jacob A. Riis, a Danish immigrant and a police reporter
on New York’s Lower East Side, published a book titled
How the Other Half Lives—Studies Among the Tenements
of New York [3], which swayed public opinion in the
direction of housing reform and resulted in the Tenement
House Act of 1901. The basic principles established in
the Tenement House Act of 1901 still underlie much of
the housing efforts in New York City today [4]. Since
1909, with the establishment of the Philadelphia
Housing Association, that city has had almost continual
inspection and improvement. Chicago enacted housing
legislation as early as 1889 and health legislation as early
as 1881. Regulations on ventilation, light, drainage, and
plumbing were put into effect in 1896.

Chapter 3: Housing Regulations 3-1



Page 424: Before 1892, all government involvement in housing was
at a local level. In 1892, however, the federal government
passed a resolution authorizing investigation of slum con-
ditions in cities with 200,000 or more inhabitants.
Congress appropriated only $20,000 (roughly equal to
$390,000 in 2003) to cover the expenses of this project,
which limited the number of investigations.

No significant housing legislation was passed in the 20th
century until 1929 [5], when the New York State legisla-
ture passed its Multiple Dwelling Law. Other cities and
states followed New York’s example and permitted less
strict requirements in their codes. This decreased what
little emphasis there was on enforcement. Conditions
declined until, by the 1930s, President Franklin D.
Roosevelt’s shocking report to the people was “that one-
third of the nation is ill-fed, ill-housed, and ill-clothed.”
In response to the overwhelming loss of homes during
the Great Depression, Congress passed the United States
Housing Act of 1937, which created the United States
Housing Authority (USHA). This act subsidized con-
struction of new public housing units and required the
elimination of at least an equivalent number of units
from the local housing supply that were determined to be
inferior. In 1942, the USHA was renamed the Federal
Public Housing Administration and, in 1947, was
renamed the Public Housing Administration.

The federal government not only encouraged the con-
struction of public housing, but took on the role of
financing private housing. In 1938, the Federal National
Mortgage Association was created. (Fannie Mae became a
private organization in 1968 [6].) Its purpose was to pro-
vide a secondary market for the FHA, created in 1934,
and Veterans Administration (VA) mortgage loans. The
Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, also known as
the GI Bill of Rights, created a VA loan program guaran-
teeing home mortgage loans for veterans. This legislation,
in conjunction with the FHA loan program, was the
impetus for initiating the huge program of home con-
struction and subsequent suburban growth following
World War II. In 1946, the Farmers Home
Administration, housed in the United States Department
of Agriculture (USDA), was created to make loans and
grants for constructing and repairing farm homes and
assisting rural self-help housing groups.

The Housing Act of 1949 allowed “primarily residential”
and “blighted” urban areas to be condemned, cleared of
buildings, and sold for private development. In addition
to assisting in slum clearance, this act also provided for

additional public housing and authorized the USDA to

3-2 Chapter 3: Housing Regulations

provide farmers with loans to construct, improve, repair
or replace dwellings to provide decent, safe, and sanitary
living conditions for themselves, their tenants, lessees,
sharecroppers, and laborers.

Because the many housing responsibilities administered
by various agencies within the federal government proved
unwieldy, the Housing and Urban Development Act was
passed in 1965. The U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) was created to centralize the
responsibilities of the Housing and Home Finance
Agency and incorporated the FHA, the Federal National
Mortgage Association, the Public Housing
Administration, Urban Development Administration, and
the Community Facilities Administration.

Zoning, Housing Codes, and Building Codes
Housing is inextricably linked to the land on which it is
located. Changes in the patterns of land use in the United
States, shifting demographics, an awareness of the need
for environmental stewardship, and competing uses for
increasingly scarce (desirable) land have all placed added
stress on the traditional relationship between the property
owner and the community. This is certainly not a new
development.

In the early settlement of this country, following the prec-
edent set by their forefathers from Great Britain, gun-
powder mills and storehouses were prohibited from the
heavily populated portions of towns, owing to the fre-
quent fires and explosions. Later, zoning took the form of
fire districts and, under implied legislative powers,
wooden buildings were prohibited from certain sections
of a municipality. Massachusetts passed one of the first
zoning laws in 1692. This law authorized Boston, Salem,
Charlestown, and certain other market towns in the prov-
ince to restrict the establishment of slaughterhouses and
stillhouses for currying leather to certain locations in each
town.

Few people objected to such restrictions. Still, the tension
remained between the right to use one’s land and the
community’s right to protect its citizens. In 1926, the
United States Supreme Court took up the issue in Village
of Euclid, Ohio, v. Ambler Realty [7]. In this decision,
the Court noted,

“Until recent years, urban life was
comparatively simple; but with great increase
and concentration of population, problems have
developed which require additional restrictions
in respect of the use and occupation of private
lands in urban communities.”

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 425: In explaining its reasoning, the Court said,

“the law of nuisances may be consulted not
for the purpose of controlling, but for the
helpful aid of its analogies in the process of
ascertaining the scope of the police power.
Thus the question of whether the power
exists to forbid the erection of a building of a
particular kind or a particular use is to be
determined, not by an abstract consideration
of the building or other thing considered
apart, but by considering it in connection
with the circumstances and the locality...

A nuisance may be merely the right thing in
the wrong place—like a pig in the parlor
instead of the barnyard.”

Zoning, housing, and building codes were adopted to
improve the health and safety of people living in commu-
nities. And, to some extent, they have performed this func-
tion. Certainly, housing and building codes, when
enforced, have resulted in better constructed and main-
tained buildings. Zoning codes have been effective in seg-
regating noxious and dangerous enterprises from residential
areas. However, as the U.S. population has grown and
changed from a rural to an urban then to a suburban soci-
ety, land use and building regulations developed for the
19th and early 20th centuries are creating new health and
safety problems not envisioned in earlier times.

Zoning and Zoning Ordinances

Zoning is essentially a means of ensuring that a commu-
nity’s land uses are compatible with the health, safety, and
general welfare of the community. Experience has shown
that some types of controls are needed to provide orderly
growth in relation to the community plan for develop-
ment. Just as a capital improvement program governs
public improvements such as streets, parks and other rec-
reational facilities, schools, and public buildings, so zon-
ing governs the planning program with respect to the use
of public and private property.

It is very important that housing inspectors know the
general nature of zoning regulations because properties in
violation of both the housing code and the zoning ordi-
nance must be brought into full compliance with the
zoning ordinance before the housing code can be
enforced. In many cases, the housing inspector may be
able to eliminate violations or properties in violation of
housing codes through enforcement of the zoning
ordinance.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Zoning Objectives

As stated earlier, the purpose of a zoning ordinance is to
ensure that the land uses within a community are regu-
lated not only for the health, safety, and welfare of the
community, but also are in keeping with the comprehen-
sive plan for community development. The provisions in
a zoning ordinance that help to achieve development that
provides for health, safety, and welfare are designed to do
the following:

¢ Regulate height, bulk, and area of structure. To
provide established standards for healthful housing
within the community, regulations dealing with
building heights, lot coverage, and floor areas must be
established. These regulations then ensure that
adequate natural lighting, ventilation, privacy, and
recreational areas for children will be realized. These
are all fundamental physiologic needs necessary for a
healthful environment. Safety from fires is enhanced
by separating buildings to meet yard and open-space
requirements. Through requiring a minimum lot area
per dwelling unit, population density controls are
established.

¢ Avoid undue levels of noise, vibration, glare, air
pollution, and odor. By providing land-use category
districts, these environmental stresses upon the
individual can be reduced.

° Lessen street congestion by requiring off-street parking
and off-street loading.

° Facilitate adequate provision of water, sewerage,
schools, parks, and playgrounds.

° Provide safety from flooding.

¢ Conserve property values. Through careful
enforcement of the zoning ordinance provisions,
property values can be stabilized and conserved.

To understand more fully the difference between zoning
and subdivision regulations, building codes, and housing
ordinances, the housing inspector must know what can-
not be accomplished by a zoning ordinance. Items that
cannot be accomplished by a zoning ordinance include
the following:

¢ Overcrowding or substandard housing. Zoning is not
retroactive and cannot correct existing conditions.
These are corrected through enforcement of a
minimum standards housing code.

* Materials and methods of construction. Materials and
methods of construction are enforced through
building codes rather than through zoning.

Chapter 3: Housing Regulations 3-3



Page 426: © Cost of construction. Quality of construction, and
hence construction costs, are often regulated through
deed restrictions or covenants. Zoning does, however,
stabilize property values in an area by prohibiting
incompatible development, such as heavy industry in
the midst of a well-established subdivision.

¢ Subdivision design and layout. Design and layout of
subdivisions, as well as provisions for parks and streets,
are controlled through subdivision regulations.

Content of the Zoning Ordinance

Zoning ordinances establish districts of whatever size,
shape, and number the municipality deems best for carry-
ing out the purposes of the zoning ordinance. Most cities
use three major districts: residential (R), commercial (C),
and industrial (I). These three may then be subdivided
into many subdistricts, depending on local conditions;
e.g., R-1 (single-unit dwellings), R-2 (duplexes), R-3
(low-rise apartment buildings), and so on. These districts
specify the principal and accessory uses, exceptions, and

prohibitions [8].

In general, permitted land uses are based on the intensity
of land use—a less intense land use being permitted in a
more intense district, but not vice versa. For example, a
single-unit residence is a less intense land use than a mul-
tiunit dwelling (defined by HUD as more than four liv-
ing units) and hence would be permitted in a residential
district zoned for more intense land use (e.g., R-3). A
multiunit dwelling would not, however, be permitted in
an R-1 district. While intended to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the community, housing
trends in the last half of the 20th century have led a
number of public health and planning officials to ques-
tion the blind enforcement of zoning districts. These
individuals, citing such problems as urban sprawl, have
stated that municipalities need to adopt a more flexible
approach to land use regulation—one that encourages
creating mixed-use spaces, increasing population densi-
ties, and reducing reliance on the automobile.

These initiatives are often called smart growth programs.
It is imperative, if this approach is taken, that both gov-
ernmental officials and citizens be involved in the plan-
ning stage. Without this involvement, the community
may end up with major problems, such as overloaded
infrastructure, structures of inappropriate construction
crowded together, and fire and security issues for resi-
dents. Increased density could strain the existing water,
sewer and waste collection systems, as well as fire and
police services, unless proper planning is implemented.

3-4 Chapter 3: Housing Regulations

In recent years, some ordinances have been partially based
on performance standards rather than solely on land-use
intensity. For example, some types of industrial develop-
ments may be permitted in a less intense use district pro-
vided that the proposed land use creates no noise, glare,
smoke, dust, vibration, or other environmental stress
exceeding acceptable standards and provided further that
adequate off-street parking, screening, landscaping, and
similar measures are taken.

Bulk and Height Requirements. Most early zoning ordi-
nances stated that, within a particular district, the height
and bulk of any structure could not exceed certain
dimensions and specified dimensions for front, side, and
rear yards. Another approach was to use floor-area ratios
for regulation. A floor-area ratio is the relation between
the floor space of the structure and the size of the lot on
which it is located. For example, a floor-area ratio of 1
would permit either a two-story building covering 50%
of the lot, or a one-story building covering 100% of the
lot, as demonstrated in Figure 3.1. Other zoning ordi-
nances specify the maximum amount of the lot that can
be covered or merely require that a certain amount of
open space must be provided for each structure, and leave
the builder the flexibility to determine the location of the
structure. Still other ordinances, rather than specify a par-
ticular height for the structure, specify the angle of light
obstruction that will assure adequate air and light to the
surrounding structures, as demonstrated in Figure 3.2.

Yard Requirements. Zoning ordinances also contain
minimum requirements for front, rear, and side yards.
These requirements, in addition to stating the lot dimen-
sions, usually designate the amount of setback required.
Most ordinances permit the erection of auxiliary build-
ings in rear yards provided that they are located at stated
distances from all lot lines and provided sufficient open
space is maintained. If the property is a corner lot, addi-
tional requirements are established to allow visibility for
motorists.

Off-street Parking. Space for off-street parking and off-
street loading, especially for commercial buildings, is also
contained in zoning ordinances. These requirements are
based on the relationship of floor space or seating capac-
ity to land use. For example, a furniture store would
require fewer off-street parking spaces in relation to the
floor area than would a movie theater.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 427: Street

100% Coverage

Figure 3.1. Example of a Floor Area

Exceptions to the Zoning Code

Nonconforming Uses

Because zoning is not retroactive, all zoning ordinances
contain a provision for nonconforming uses. If a use has
already been established within a particular district before
the adoption of the ordinance, it must be permitted to
continue, unless it can be shown to be a public nuisance.

Provisions are, however, put into the ordinance to aid in
eliminating nonconforming uses over time. These provi-
sions generally prohibit a) an enlargement or expansion
of the nonconforming use, b) reconstruction of the non-
conforming use if more than a certain portion of the
building should be destroyed, c) resumption of the use
after it has been abandoned for a period of specified time,
and d) changing the use to a higher classification or to
another nonconforming use. Some zoning ordinances
further provide a period of amortization during which
nonconforming land use must be phased out.

Variances

Zoning ordinances contain provisions for permitting
variances and providing a method for granting these

Center Line
of Street

Figure 3.2. Example of an Angle of Light Obstruction

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

‘Side View of Building

Street

50% Coverage

variances, subject to certain specified provisions. A vari-
ance may be granted when, owing to the specific condi-
tions or use of a particular lot, an undue hardship would
be imposed on the owner if the exact content of the ordi-
nance is enforced. A variance may be granted due to the
shape, topography, or other characteristic of the lot. For
example, suppose an irregularly shaped lot is located in a
district having a side yard requirement of 20 feet on a
side and a total lot size requirement of 10,000 square feet.
Further suppose that this lot contains 10,200 square feet
(and thus meets the total size requirement); however, due
to the irregular shape of the lot, there would be sufficient
space for only a 15-foot side yard. Because a hardship
would be imposed on the owner if the exact letter of the
law is applied, the owner of the property could apply to
the zoning adjustment board for a variance. Because the
total area of the lot is sufficient and a lessening of the
ordinance requirements would not be detrimental to the
surrounding property, nor would it interfere with neigh-
boring properties, a variance would probably be granted.
Note that a variance is granted to the owner under spe-
cific conditions. Should use of the property change, the
variance would be voided.

Angle of Light

Rear
Property Line

Chapter 3: Housing Regulations 3-5



Page 428: Exceptions

An exception is often confused with a variance. In every
city there are some necessary uses that do not correspond
to the permitted land uses within the district. The zoning
code recognizes, however, that if proper safeguards are
provided, these uses would not have a detrimental effect
on the district. An example would be a fire station that
could be permitted in a residential area, provided the sta-
tion house is designed and the property is properly land-
scaped to resemble or fit in with the characteristics of the
neighborhood in which it is located.

Administration

Zoning inspectors are essential to the zoning process
because they have firsthand knowledge of a case. Often,
the zoning inspector may also be the building inspector
or housing inspector. Because the building inspector or
housing inspector is already in the field making inspec-
tions, it is relatively easy for that individual to check
compliance with the zoning ordinances. Compliance is
determined by comparing the actual land use with that
allowed for the area and shown on the zoning map.

Each zoning ordinance has a map detailing the permitted
usage for each block. Using a copy of this map, the
inspector can make a preliminary check of the land use in
the field. If the use does not conform, the inspector must
then contact the Zoning Board to see whether the prop-
erty in question was a nonconforming use at the time of
the passage of the ordinance and whether an exception or
variance has been granted. In cities where up-to-date

records are maintained, the inspector can check the use in
the field.

When a violation is observed, and the property owners
are duly notified of the violation, they have the right to
request a hearing before the Zoning Board of Adjustment
(also called the Zoning Board of Appeals in some cities).
The board may uphold the zoning enforcement officer or
may rule in favor of the property owner. If the action of
the zoning officer is upheld, the property owner may, if
desired, seek relief by appealing the decision to the
courts; otherwise, the violation must be corrected to con-
form to the zoning code.

It is critical for the housing or building inspector and the
zoning inspector to work closely in municipalities where
these positions and responsibilities are separate.
Experience has shown that illegally converted properties
are often among the most substandard encountered in the
municipality and often contain especially dangerous
housing code violations.

3-6 Chapter 3: Housing Regulations

In communities where the zoning code is enforced effec-
tively, the resulting zoning compliance helps to advance,
as well as sustain, many of the minimum standards of the
housing code such as occupancy, ventilation, light, and
unimpeded egress. By the same token, building or hous-
ing inspectors can often aid the zoning inspector by help-
ing eliminate some nonconforming uses through code
enforcement.

Housing Codes

A housing code, regardless of who promulgates it, is basi-
cally an environmental health protection code. Housing
codes are distinguished from building codes in that they
cover houses, not buildings in general. For example, the
housing code requires that walls support the weight of the
roof, any floors above, and the furnishings, occupants,
etc., within a building.

Early housing codes primarily protected only physical
health; hence, they were enforced only in slum areas. In
the 1970s, it was realized that, if urban blight and its
associated human suffering were to be controlled, housing
codes must consider both physical and mental health and
must be administered uniformly throughout the
community.

In preparing or revising housing codes, local officials
must maintain a level of standards that will not merely be
minimal. Standards should maintain a living environment
that contributes positively to healthful individual and
family living. The fact that a small portion of housing
fails to meet a desirable standard is not a legitimate rea-
son for retrogressive modification or abolition of a stan-
dard. The adoption of a housing ordinance that
establishes low standards for existing housing serves only
to legalize and perpetuate an unhealthy living environ-
ment. Wherever local conditions are such that immediate
enforcement of some standards within the code would
cause undue hardship for some individuals, it is better to
allow some time for compliance than to eliminate an oth-
erwise satisfactory standard. When immediate health or
safety hazards are not involved, it is often wise to attempt
to create a reasonable timetable for accomplishing neces-
sary code modifications.

History

To assist municipalities with developing legislation neces-
sary to regulate the quality of housing, the American
Public Health Association (APHA) Committee on the
Hygiene of Housing prepared and published in 1952 a
proposed housing ordinance. This provided a prototype
on which such legislation might be based and has served

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 429: as the basis for countless housing codes enacted in the
United States since that time. Some municipalities
enacted it without change. Others made revisions by
omitting some portions, modifying others, and some-
times adding new provisions [9].

The APHA ordinance was revised in 1969 and 1971. In
1975, APHA and the CDC jointly undertook the job of
rewriting and updating this model ordinance. The new
ordinance was entitled the APHA-CDC Recommended
Housing Maintenance and Occupancy Ordinance |10]. The
most recent model ordinance was published by APHA in
1986 as Housing and Health: APHA-CDC Recommended
Minimum Housing Standards 11]. This new ordinance is
one of several model ordinances available to communities
when they are interested in adopting a housing code.

A community should read and consider each element
within the model code to determine its applicability to
their community. A housing code is merely a means to an
end. The end is the eventual elimination of all substan-
dard conditions within the home and the neighborhood.
This end cannot be achieved if the community adopts an
inadequate housing code.

Objectives

The Housing Act of 1949 [12] gave new impetus to
existing local, state, and federal housing programs
directed toward eliminating poor housing. In passing this
legislation, Congress defined a new national objective by
declaring that “the general welfare and security of the
nation and the health and living standards of its people...
require a decent home and a suitable living environment
for every American family.” This mandate generated an
awareness that the quality of housing and residential envi-
ronment has an enormous influence upon the physical
and mental health and the social well-being of each indi-
vidual and, in turn, on the economic, political, and social
conditions in every community. Consequently, public
agencies, units of government, professional organizations
and others sought ways to ensure that the quality of
housing and the residential environment did not
deteriorate.

It soon became apparent that ordinances regulating the
supplied utilities and the maintenance and occupancy of
dwellings were needed. Commonly called housing codes,
these ordinances establish minimum standards to make
dwellings safe, sanitary, and fit for human habitation by
governing their condition and maintenance, their sup-
plied utilities and facilities, and their occupancy. The
2003 International Code Council (ICC) [13,14]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

International Residential Code-One- and Two-Family
Dwellings (R101.3) states

‘the purpose of this code is to provide minimum
requirements to safeguard the public safety, health and
general welfare, through affordability, structural strength,
means of egress, facilities, stability, sanitation, light

and ventilation, energy conservation, safety to fire and
property from fire and other hazards attributed to the

built environment.”

Critical Requirements of an Effective Housing Program

A housing code is limited in its effectiveness by several
factors. First, if the housing code does not contain stan-
dards that adequately protect the health and well-being of
the individuals, it cannot be effective. The best-trained
housing inspector, if not armed with an adequate housing
code, can accomplish little good in the battle against

urban blight.

A second issue in establishing an effective housing code is
the need to establish a baseline of current housing condi-
tions. A systems approach requires that you establish
where you are, where you are going, and how you plan to
achieve your goals. In using a systems approach, it is
essential to know where the program started so that the
success or failure of various initiatives can be established.
Without this information, success cannot be replicated,
because you cannot identify the obstacles navigated nor
the elements of success. Many initiatives fail because pro-
gram administrators are without the necessary proof of
success when facing funding shortfalls and budget cuts.

A third factor affecting the quality of housing codes is
budget. Without adequate funds and personnel, the com-
munity can expect to lose the battle against urban blight.
It is only through a systematic enforcement effort by an
adequately sized staff of properly trained inspectors that
the battle can be won.

A fourth factor is the attitude of the political bodies
within the area. A properly administered housing pro-
gram will require upgrading substandard housing
throughout the community. Frequently, this results in
political pressures being exerted to prevent the enforce-
ment of the code in certain areas of the city. If the hous-
ing effort is backed properly by all political elements,
blight can be controlled and eventually eliminated within
the community. If, however, the housing program is not
permitted to choke out the spreading influence of sub-
standard conditions, urban blight will spread like a can-
cer, engulfing greater and greater portions of the city.
Similarly, an effort directed at only the most seriously

Chapter 3: Housing Regulations 3-7



Page 430: blighted blocks in the city will upgrade merely those
blocks, while the blight spreads elsewhere. If urban blight

is to be controlled, it must be cut out in its entirety.

A fifth element that limits housing programs is whether
they are supported fully by the other departments within
the city. Regardless of which city agency administers the
housing program, other city agencies must support the
activities of the housing program. In addition, great effort
should be expended to obtain the support and coopera-
tion of the community. This can be accomplished
through public awareness and public information pro-
grams, which can result in considerable support or con-
siderable resistance to the efforts of the program.

A sixth limitation is an inadequately or improperly
trained inspection staff. Inspectors should be capable of
evaluating whether a serious or a minor problem exists in
matters ranging from the structural stability of a building
to the health and sanitary aspects of the structure. If they
do not have the authority or expertise, they should
develop that expertise or establish effective and efficient
agreements with overlapping agencies to ensure timely
and appropriate response.

A seventh item that frequently restricts the effectiveness
of a housing program is the fact that many housing
groups fail to do a complete job of evaluating housing
problems. The deterioration of an area may be due to fac-
tors such as housing affordability, tax rates, or issues
related to investment cost and return. In many cases, the
inspection effort is restricted to merely evaluating the
conditions that exist, with little or no thought given to
why these conditions exist. If a housing effort is to be
successful, as part of a systems approach, the question of
why the homes deteriorated must be considered. Was it
because of environmental stresses within the neighbor-
hood that need to be eliminated or was it because of apa-
thy on the part of the occupants? In either case, if the
causative agent is not removed, then the inspector faces
an annual problem of maintaining the quality of that resi-
dence. It is only by eliminating the causes of deterioration
that the quality of the neighborhood can be maintained.
Often the regulatory authority does not have adequate
authority within the enabling legislation of the code
needed to resolve the problem or there are gaps in
jurisdiction.

Content of a Housing Code

Although all comprehensive housing codes or ordinances
contain a number of common elements, the provisions of
communities will usually vary. These variations stem from

3-8 Chapter 3: Housing Regulations

differences in local policies, preferences, and, to a lesser
extent, needs. They are also influenced by the standards
set by the related provisions of the diverse building, elec-
trical, and plumbing codes in use in the municipality.

Within any housing code there are generally five features:
1. Definitions of terms used in the code.

2. Administrative provisions showing who is authorized to
administer the code and the basic methods and procedures
that must be followed in implementing and enforcing the
sections of the code. Administrative provisions deal with
items such as reasonable hours of inspections, whether
serving violation notices is required, how to notify
absentee owners or resident-owners or tenants, how to
process and conduct hearings, what rules to follow in
processing dwellings alleged to be unfit for human

habitation, and how to occupy or use dwellings finally
declared fit.

3. Substantive provisions specifying the various types of
health, building, electrical, heating, plumbing,
maintenance, occupancy, and use conditions that
constitute violations of the housing code. These provisions
can be and often are grouped into three categories:
minimum facilities and equipment for dwelling units;
adequate maintenance of dwellings and dwelling units, as
well as their facilities and equipment; and occupancy
conditions of dwellings and dwelling units.

4. Court and penalty sections outlining the basis for court
action and thepenalty or penalties to which the alleged
violator will be subjected if proved guilty of violating one

or more provisions of the code.

5. Enabling, conflict, and unconstitutionality clauses
providing the date a new or amended code will take effect,
prevalence of more stringent provision when there is a
conflict of two codes, severability of any part of the
ordinance that might be found unconstitutional, and
retention of all other parts in full course and effect. In any
city following the format of the APHA-CDC
Recommended Housing Maintenance and Occupancy
Ordinance {10} the housing officer or other supervisor in
charge of housing inspections will also adopt appropriate
housing rules and regulations from time to time to clarify
or further refine the provisions of the ordinance. When
rules and regulations are used, care should be taken that
the department is not overburdened with a number of
minor rules and regulations. Similarly, a housing
ordinance that encompasses all rules and regulations might
have difficulty because any amendments to it will require
action by the political element of the community. Some

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 431: housing groups, in attempting to obtain amendments to

an ordinance, have had the entire ordinance thrown out
by the political bodies.

Administrative Provisions of a Housing Code

The administrative procedures and powers of the housing
inspection agency, its supervisors, and its staff are similar
to other provisions in that all are based on the police
power of the state to legislate for public health and safety.
In addition, the administrative provisions, and to a lesser
extent, the court and penalty provisions, outline how the
police power is to be exercised in administering and
enforcing the code.

Generally, the administrative elements deal with proce-
dures for ensuring that the constitutional doctrines of rea-
sonableness, equal protection under the law and due
process of law are observed. They also must guard against
violation of prohibitions against unlawful search and sei-
zure, impairment of obligations of contract, and unlawful
delegation of authority. These factors encompass items of
great importance to housing inspection supervisors such
as the inspector's right of entry, reasonable hours of
inspection, proper service, and the validity of the provi-
sions of the housing codes they administer.

Owner of Record. It is essential to file legal actions
against the true owners of properties in violation of hous-
ing codes. With the advent of the computer, this is often
much easier than in the past. Databases that provide this
information are readily available from many offices of
local government such as the tax assessment office. The
method of obtaining the name and address of the legal
owner of a property in violation varies from place to
place. Ordinarily, a check of the city tax records will suf-
fice unless there is reason to believe these are not up to
date. In this case, a further check of county or parish
records will turn up the legal owner if state law requires
deed registration there. If it does not, the advice of the
municipal law department should be sought about the
next steps to follow.

Due Process Requirements. Every notice, complaint,
summons, or other type of legal paper concerning alleged
housing code violations in a given dwelling or dwelling
unit must be legally served on the proper party to be valid
and to prevent harassment of innocent parties. This might
be the owner, agent, or tenant, as required by the code. It
is customary to require that the notice to correct existing
violations and any subsequent notices or letters be served
by certified or registered mail with return receipt request-
ed. The receipt serves as proof of service if the case has to
be taken to court.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Due process requirements also call for clarity and specific-
ity with respect to the alleged violations, both in the vio-
lation notices and the court complaint-summons. For this
reason, special care must be taken to be complete and
accurate in listing the violations and charges. To illustrate,
rather than direct the violator to repair all windows where
needed, the violator should be told exactly which win-
dows and what repairs are involved.

The chief limitation on the due process requirement, with
respect to service of notices, lies in cases involving imme-
diate threats to health and safety. In these instances, the
inspection agency or its representative may, without notice
or hearing, issue an order citing the existence of the emer-
gency and requiring that action deemed necessary to meet
the emergency be taken.

In some areas housing courts on the municipal level have
advocates that assist both plaintiffs and defendants pre-
pare for the court process or to resolve the issue to avoid
court.

Hearings and Condemnation Power. The purpose of a
hearing is to give the alleged violator an opportunity to be
heard before further action is taken by the housing inspec-
tion agency. These hearings may be very informal, involv-
ing meetings between a representative of the agency and
the person ordered to take corrective action. They also
may be formal hearings at which the agency head presides
and at which the city and the defendant both are entitled
to be represented by counsel and expert witnesses.

Informal Hearings. A violator may have questions about a
violation notice or the notice may be served at a time
when personal hardship or other factors prevent a violator
from meeting the terms of the notice. Therefore, many
housing codes provide the opportunity for a hearing at
which the violator may discuss questions or problems and
seek additional time or some modification of the order.
Administered in a firm but understanding manner, these
hearings can serve as invaluable aids in relieving needless
fears of those involved, in showing how the inspection
program is designed to help them and in winning their
voluntary compliance.

Formal Hearings. Formal hearings are often quasijudicial
hearings (even though the prevailing court rules of evi-
dence do not always apply) from which an appeal may be
taken to court. All witnesses must therefore be sworn in,
and a record of the proceedings must be made. The for-
mal hearing is used chiefly as the basis for determining
whether a dwelling is fit for human habitation, occu-
pancy, or use. In the event it is proved unfit, the building
is condemned and the owner is given a designated

Chapter 3: Housing Regulations 3-9



Page 432: amount of time either to rehabilitate it completely or to
demolish it. Where local funds are available, a municipal-
ity may demolish the building and place a lien against the
property to cover demolition costs if the owner fails to
obey the order within the time specified. This type of
condemnation hearing is a very effective means of stimu-
lating prompt and appropriate corrective action when it is
administered fairly and firmly.

Procedures for Coping With Common Problems. Sev-
eral states and local communities have developed innova-
tive ways to resolve code violation issues.

Limitation of Occupancy Notification. This technique was
pioneered in Wilmington, Delaware. It makes it manda-
tory for property owners in the community to obtain a
legal notice from the housing inspection agency specify-
ing the maximum number of persons that may occupy
each of their properties. It also requires these owners to
have a residence, place of business, or an agent for their
properties within the community. The agent should be
empowered to take remedial action on any of the proper-
ties found in violation. In addition, if the property is
sold, the new owner must obtain a new Limitation of
Occupancy Notification.

Request for Inspections. Several states permit their munici-
palities to offer a request for inspection service. For a fee,
the housing inspector will inspect a property for viola-
tions of the housing code before its sale so that the buyer
can learn its condition in advance. Many states and local-
ities now require owners to notify prospective purchasers
of any outstanding notice of health risk or violations they
have against their property before the sale. If they fail to
do so, some codes will hold the owner liable to the pur-
chaser and the inspection agency for violations.

Tickets for Minor Offenses. Denver, Colorado, has used
minimal financial fines to prod minor violators and first
offenders into correcting violations without the city
resorting to court action. There are mixed views about
this technique because it is akin to formal police action.
Nevertheless, the action may stimulate compliance and
reduce the amount of court action needed to achieve it.

Forms and Form Letters. A fairly typical set of forms
and form letters are described below. It should be stressed
that inspection forms to be used for legal notices must
satisfy legal standards of the code, be meaningful to the
owner and sufficiently explicit about the extent and loca-
tion of particular defects, be adaptable to statistical com-
pilation for the governing body reports, and be written in
a manner that will facilitate clerical and other administra-
tive usage.

3-10 Chapter 3: Housing Regulations

The Daily Report Form. This form gives the inspection
agency an accurate basis for reporting, evaluating, and, if
necessary, improving the productivity and performance of
its inspectors.

Complaint Form. This form helps obtain full information
from the complainant and thus makes the relative seri-
ousness of the problem clear and reduces the number of
crank complaints.

No-entry Notice. This notice advises occupants or owners
that an inspector was there and that they must return a
call to the inspector.

Inspection Report Form. This is the most important form
in an agency. It comes in countless varieties, but if
designed properly, it will ensure more productivity and
more thoroughness by the inspectors, reduce the time
spent in writing reports, locate all violations correctly, and
reduce the time required for typing violation notices.
Forms may vary widely in sophistication from a very sim-
ple form to one whose components are identified by
number for use in processing the case by automation.
Some forms are a combined inspection report and notice
form in triplicate so that the first page can be used as the
notice of violation, the second as the office record, and
the third as the guide for reinspection. A covering form
letter notifies the violator of the time allowed to correct
the conditions listed in the report form.

Violation Notice. This is the legal notice that housing code
violations exist and must be corrected within the indi-
cated amount of time. The notice may be in the form of
a letter that includes the alleged violations or has a copy
of these attached. It may be a standard notice form, or it
may be a combined report-notice. Regardless of the type
of notice used, it should make the location and nature of
all violations clear and specify the exact section of the
code that covers each one. The notice must advise viola-
tors of their right to a hearing. It should also indicate that
the violator has a right to be represented by counsel and
that failure to obtain counsel will not be accepted as
grounds for postponing a hearing or court case.

Hearing Forms. These should include a form letter notify-
ing the violator of the date and time set for the hearing, a
standard summary sheet on which the supervisor can
record the facts presented at an informal hearing, and a
hearing-decision letter for notifying all concerned of the
hearing results. The latter should include the names of
the violator, inspector, law department, and any other
city official or agency that may be involved in the case.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 433: Reinspection Form Letters or Notices. These have the same
characteristics as violation notices except that they cover
the follow-up orders given to the violator who has failed
to comply with the original notice within the time speci-
fied. Some agencies may use two or three types of these
form letters to accommodate different degrees of response
by the violator. Whether one or several are used, stan-
dardization of these letters or notices will expedite the
processing of cases.

Court Complaint and Summons Forms. These forms advise
alleged violators of the charges against them and summon
them to appear in court at the specified time and place. It
is essential that the housing inspection agency work
closely with the municipal law department in preparing
these forms so that each is done in exact accord with the
rules of court procedure in the relevant state and
community.

Court Action Record Form. This form provides an accurate
running record of the inspection agency’s court actions
and their results.

Substantive Provisions of a Housing Code

A housing code is the primary tool of the housing inspec-
tor. The code spells out what the inspector may or may
not do. An effort to improve housing conditions can be
no better than the code allows. The substantive provisions
of the code specify the minimal housing conditions
acceptable to the community that developed them.

Dwelling units should have provisions for preparing at
least one regularly cooked meal per day. Minimum equip-
ment should include a kitchen sink in good working con-
dition and properly connected to the water supply system
approved by the appropriate authority. It should provide,
at all times, an adequate amount of heated and unheated
running water under pressure and should be connected to
a sewer system approved by the appropriate authority.
Cabinets or shelves, or both, for storing eating, drinking,
and cooking utensils and food should be provided. These
surfaces should be of sound construction and made of
material that is easy to clean and that will not have a
toxic or deleterious effect on food.

In addition, a stove and refrigerator should be provided.
Within every dwelling there should be a room that
affords privacy and is equipped with a flush toilet in good
working condition.

Within the vicinity of the flush toilet, a sink should be
provided. In no case should a kitchen sink substitute as a
lavatory sink. In addition, within each dwelling unit there

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

should be, within a room that affords privacy, either a
bathtub or shower or both, in good working condition.
Both the lavatory sink and the bathtub or shower or both
should be equipped with an adequate amount of heated
and unheated water under pressure. Each should be con-
nected to an approved sewer system.

Within each dwelling unit two or more means of egress
should be provided to safe and open space at ground
level. Provisions should be incorporated within the hous-
ing code to meet the safety requirements of the state and
community involved. The housing code should spell out
minimum standards for lighting and ventilation within
each room in the structure. In addition, minimum ther-
mal standards should be provided. Although most codes
merely provide the requirement of a given temperature at
a given height above floor level, the community should
give consideration to the use of effective temperatures.
The effective temperature is a means of incorporating not
only absolute temperature in degrees, but also humidity
and air movement, giving a better indication of the com-
fort index of a room.

The code should provide that no person shall occupy or
let for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling units that do
not comply with stated requirements. Generally, these
requirements specify that the foundation, roof, exterior
walls, doors, window space and windows of the structure
be sound and in good repair; that it be moisture-free,
watertight and reasonably weather tight and that all struc-
tural surfaces be sound and in good repair.

HUD defines a multifamily dwelling unit as one that
contains four or more dwelling units in a single structure.
A dwelling unit is further defined as a single unit of resi-
dence for a family of one or more persons in which sleep-
ing accommodations are provided but toileting or
cooking facilities are shared by the occupants.

Building Codes

Building codes define what materials and methods are
tobe used in the construction of various buildings. Model
building codes have been published by various trade orga-
nizations such as the Southern Building Code Congress
International (SBCCT), Building Officials and Code
Administrators (BOCA), and the International
Conference of Building Officials (ICBO). Each of these
groups published a model building code that was widely
used or adapted regionally in the United States. BOCA
national codes were used mostly in eastern and Great
Lakes states, ICBO uniform codes in western and
Midwest states, and SBCCI standard codes in southern
states. As a result, the construction industry often faced

Chapter 3: Housing Regulations 3-11



Page 434: the challenge, and cost, of building to different codes in
different areas of the country.

In 1994, BOCA, ICBO, and SBCCI created the
International Code Council (ICC) to develop a single set
of comprehensive, coordinated model construction codes
that could be used throughout the United States and
around the world. The first I-Code published was the
International Plumbing Code in 1995. By 2000, a com-
plete family of I-Codes was available, including the
International Building Code. The ICC Performance
Code for Buildings and Facilities joined the I-Code fam-
ily in 2001.

On February 1, 2003, the three organizations (BOCA,
SBCCI, and ICBO) were consolidated into the ICC
[13,14]. According to ICC Board president, Paul E.
Myers,

“The ICC International Codes (I Codes) combine the
strengths of the regional codes without regional limita-
tions. The ICC is a nonprofit organization dedicated to
developing a single set of comprehensive and coordinated
national codes to make compliance easier and more cost-
effective. I Codes respond to the needs of the construction
industry and public safety. A single set of codes has strong
support from government, code enforcement officials, fire
officials, architects, engineers, builders, developers, and
building owners and managers.”

References
1. Hammurabi’s Code of Laws. Translated by L.W. King.
Available from URL: http://eawc.evansville.edu/anthology/

hammurabi.htm.

2. Claghorn KH. The foreign immigrant in New York City.
Reports of the Industrial Commission, Volume XV.
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office;
1901.p. 465-92. Available from URL: http://tenant.net/
Community/LES/clag2.html.

3. Riis J. How the other half lives— studies among the
tenements of New York. New York: Charles Scriber’s Sons;
1890. Available from URL: http://www.bartleby.
com/208/.

4. New York City Department of City Planning. New York
City zoning: zoning history. New York City: New York
City Department of City Planning; no date. Available
from URL: http://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/html/zone/
zonehis.huml.

3-12 Chapter 3: Housing Regulations

5. New York State Multiple Dwelling Law: chapter 713 of
the Laws of 1929, as amended. Available from URL:
http://tenant.net/Other_Laws/MDL/mdltoc.huml.

6. Understanding Fannie Mae: our history. Washington,
DC: Fannie Mae; 2005. Available from URL: http:/Avww.
fanniemae.com/aboutfm/understanding/history,jhtml?p=
About+Fannie+Mae&s=Understanding+Fannie+Mae&t=
Our+History.

7. Paulson PB. Protecting zoning laws. Atlanta: North
Buckhead Civic Association; 2000 18 Mar. Available from
URL: http://www.nbca.org/TAP_AJC_3-18.htm.

8. Municipal Code Corporation. Municipal building codes
(online library). Tallahassee, FL: Municipal Code
Corporation. Available from URL: http://www.municode.

com/resources/online_codes.asp.

9. American Public Health Association. Housing ordinance.
Am J Public Health 1952 Jan;42(1):76-7.

10. US Public Health Service. APHA-CDC recommended
housing maintenance and occupancy ordinance. Atlanta:
US Department of Health and Human Services; 1975.

11. American Public Health Association. Housing and health:
APHA-CDC recommended minimum housing
standards. Washington, DC: American Public Health
Association; 1986.

12. Lang RE, Sohmer RR, editors. Legacy of the Housing Act
of 1949: The past, present, and future of federal housing
and urban policy. Housing Policy Debate 200051 1(2):
291-7. Available from URL: http://www.
fanniemaefoundation.org/programs/hpd/pdf/ hpd_ 1102
edintro.pdf.

13. International Code Council. International residential code
2003. Country Club Hills, IL: ICC; 2003.

14, International Code Council. International building code
2003. Country Club Hills, IL: ICC; 2003.

Additional Sources of Information
American Planning Association. Available from URL:
http://www.planning.org/.

Arendt R. “Open Space” zoning: what it is and why it
works. Planners Commission Journal 1992. Available
from URL: http://www.plannersweb.com/articles/are015.
html.

Bookmark, Inc. Available from URL: http://www.book-

marki.com.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 435: International Code Council. Available from URL:
http://www.iccsafe.org.

Rosenberg M. Zoning: residential, commercial, or indus-
trial? New York: About, Inc.; no date. Available from
URL: http://geography.about.com/library/weekly/
aa072801la.htm?iam=sherlock_abc/.

US Department of Energy, Land Use Planning. Smart
Communities Network. Washington, DC: US
Department of Energy; no date. Available from URL:
http://www. smartcommunities.ncat.org/landuse/luintro.
shtml.

US Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Available from URL: http://www.hud.gov/.

US Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Final report of HUD review of model building codes.
Washington, DC: US Department of Housing and
Urban Development; no date. Available from URL:
http://www.hud.gov/offices/fheo/disabilities/modelcodes/

chapter5.html.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Chapter 3: Housing Regulations

3-13



Page 436: 3-14 Chapter 3: Housing Regulations Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 437: Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests

“Sometimes poor housing is a shorthand way of describing
living conditions of poor people. The poor include the aged,
deprived, ethnic minority groups, the infirmed, and families
headed by unemployed women. In other words, the people
most at risk for illness often live in inferior housing.
Therefore, it is a matter of conjecture whether many people
live in poor housing because they are sick or are sick because

they live in poor housing.”

Carter L. Marshall, M.D.
Dynamics of Health and Disease
Appleton, Century Crofts 1972

Introduction

The most immediate and obvious link between housing
and health involves exposure to biologic, chemical, and
physical agents that can affect the health and safety of the
occupants of the home. Conditions such as childhood
lead poisoning and respiratory illnesses caused by expo-
sure to radon, asbestos, tobacco smoke, and other pollut-
ants are increasingly well understood and documented.
However, even 50 years ago, public health officials under-
stood that housing conditions were linked to a broader
pattern of community health. For example, in 1949, the
Surgeon General released a report comparing several
health status indicators among six cities having slums.
The publication reported that:

the rate of deaths from communicable disease in these
areas was the same as it was for the rest of the country
50 years ago (i.e., around 1900);

° most of the tuberculosis cases came from 25% of the
population of these cities; and

° the infant mortality rate was five times higher than in
the rest of the country, approximately equal to what it
was 50 years ago.

Housing-related health concerns include asthma episodes
triggered by exposure to dust mites, cockroaches, pets,
and rodents. The existence of cockroaches, rats, and mice
mean that they can also be vectors for significant prob-
lems that affect health and well-being. They are capable
of transmitting diseases to humans. According to a 1997
American Housing Survey, rats and mice infested 2.7 mil-
lion of 97 million housing units. A CDC-sponsored sur-
vey of two major American cities documented that nearly
50% of the premises were infected with rats and mice.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

This chapter deals with disease vectors and pests as fac-
tors related to the health of households.

Disease Vectors and Pests

Integrated pest management (IPM) techniques are neces-
sary to reduce the number of pests that threaten human
health and property. This systems approach to the prob-
lem relies on more than one technique to reduce or elimi-
nate pests. It can be visualized best as concentric rings of
protection that reduce the need for the most risky and
dangerous options of control and the potential for pests
to evolve and develop. It typically involves using some or
all of the following steps:

* monitoring, identifying, and determining the level of
threat from pests;

¢ making the environment hostile to pests;

* building the pests out by using pest-proof building

materials;

° eliminating food sources, hiding areas, and other pest
attractants;

* using traps and other physical elimination devices; and

¢ when necessary, selecting appropriate poisons for
identified pests.

The above actions are discussed in more detail in the fol-
lowing section on the four basic strategies for controlling
rodents.

Most homeowners have encountered a problem with
rodents, cockroaches, fleas, flies, termites, or fire ants.
These pests destroy property or carry disease, or both,
and can be a problem for rich and poor alike.

Rodents

Rodents destroy property, spread disease, compete for
human food sources, and are aesthetically displeasing.
Rodent-associated diseases affecting humans include
plague, murine typhus, leptospirosis, rickettsialpox, and
rat-bite fever. The three primary rodents of concern to
the homeowner are the Norway rat (Rattus norvegicus),
roof rat (Rattus rattus), and the house mouse (Mus muscu-
/us). The term “commensal” is applied to these rodents,
meaning they live at people's expense. The physical traits
of each are demonstrated in Figure 4.1.

Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests 4-1



Page 438: FIELD IDENTIFICATION OF DOMESTIC RODENTS

Figure 4.1. Field Identification of Domestic Rodents [2]

Barnett [1] notes that the house mouse is abundant
throughout the United States. The Norway rat (Figure
4.2) is found throughout the temperate regions of the
world, including the United States. The roof rat is found
mainly in the South, across the entire nation to the
Pacific coast. As a group, rodents have certain behavioral
characteristics that are helpful in understanding them.
They are perceptive to touch, with sensitive whiskers and
guard hairs on their bodies. Thus, they favor running
along walls and between objects that allow them constant

They are known to have
poor eyesight and are alleged
to be colorblind.
Contrastingly, they have an
extremely sharp sense of
smell and a keen sense of
taste. The word rodent is
derived from the Latin verb
rodere, meaning “to gnaw.”

The gnawing tendency leads
to structural damage to
buildings and initiates fires
when insulation is chewed
from electrical wires. Rodents will gnaw to gain entrance
and to obtain food.

Figure 4.2. Norway Rat [3]

4-2 Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests

contact with vertical surfaces.

The roof rat (Figure 4.3) is a slender, graceful, and very
agile climber. The roof rat prefers to live aboveground:
indoors in attics, between floors, in walls, or in enclosed
spaces; and outdoors in trees and dense vine growth.
Contrasted with the
roof rat, the Norway rat
is at home below the
ground, living in a bur-
row. The house mouse
commonly is found liv-
ing in human quarters,
as suggested by its
name. Signs indicative
of the presence of
rodents—aside from seeing live or dead rats and hearing
rats—are rodent droppings, runways, and tracks (Figure
4.4). Other signs include nests, gnawings, food scraps, rat
hair, urine spots, and rat body odors. Note that waste
droppings from rodents are often confused with cock-
roach egg packets, which are smooth, segmented, and
considerably smaller than a mouse dropping.

Figure 4.3. Roof Rat [4]

According to the Military Pest Management Handbook
(MPMH) [2], rats and mice are very suspicious of any
new objects or food found in their surroundings. This
characteristic is one reason rodents can survive in danger-
ous environments. This avoidance reaction accounts for

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 439: prebaiting (baiting without poisoning) in control pro-
grams. Initially, rats or mice begin by taking only small
amounts of food. If the animal becomes ill from a sub-
lethal dose of poison, its avoidance reaction is strength-
ened, and a poisoning program becomes extremely
difficult to complete. If rodents are hungry or exposed to
an environment where new objects and food are com-
monly found, such as a dump, their avoidance reaction
may not be as strong; in extreme cases of hunger, it may
even be absent.

The first of four basic strategies for controlling rodents is
to eliminate food sources. To accomplish this, it is
imperative for the homeowner or occupant to do a good
job of solid waste management. This requires proper stor-
ing, collecting, and disposing of refuse.

The second strategy is to eliminate breeding and nest-
ing places. This is accomplished by removing rubbish
from near the home, including excess lumber, firewood,
and similar materials. These items should be stored above
ground with 18 inches of clearance below them. This
height does not provide a habitat for rats, which have a
propensity for dark, moist places in which to burrow.
Wood should not be stored directly on the ground, and
trash and similar rubbish should be eliminated.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

The third strategy is to construct buildings and other
structures using rat-proofing methods. MPMH notes
that it is much easier to manage rodents if a structure is
built or modified in a way that prevents easy access by
rodents. Tactics for rodent exclusion include building or
covering doors and windows with metal. Rats can gnaw
through wooden doors and windows in a very short time
to gain entrance. All holes in a building’s exterior should
be sealed. Rats are capable of enlarging openings in
masonry, especially if the mortar or brick is of poor qual-
ity. All openings more than 34-inch wide should be
closed, especially around pipes and conduits. Cracks
around doors, gratings, windows, and other such open-
ings should be covered if they are less than 4 feet above
the ground or accessible from ledges, pipes, or wires
(Figure 4.5).

Additional tactics include using proper materials for rat
proofing. For example, sheet metal of at least 26-gauge,
Y-inch or ¥-inch hardware cloth, and cement are all
suitable rat-resistant materials. However, %-inch hardware
cloth has little value against house mice. Tight fittings
and self-closing doors should be constructed. Rodent
runways can be behind double walls; therefore, spaces
between walls and floor-supporting beams should be
blocked with fire stops. A proper rodent-proofing strategy
must bear in mind that rats can routinely jump 2 feet
vertically, dig 4 feet or more to get under a foundation,
climb rough walls or smooth pipes up to 3 inches in
diameter, and routinely travel on electric or telephone
wires.

The first three strategies—good sanitation techniques,
habitat denial, and rat proofing—should be used initially
in any rodent management program. Should they fail, the
fourth strategy is a killing program, which can vary from
a family cat to the professional application of rodenti-
cides. Cats can be effective against mice, but typically are
not useful against a rat infestation. Over-the-counter
rodenticides can be purchased and used by the home-
owner or occupant. These typically are in the red squill or
warfarin groups.

A more effective alternative is trapping. There are a vari-
ety of devices to choose from when trapping rats or mice.
The two main groups of rat and mouse traps are live
traps (Figure 4.6) and kill traps (Figure 4.7). Traps usually
are placed along walls, near runways and burrows, and in
other areas. Bait is often used to attract the rodents to the
trap. To be effective, traps must be monitored and emp-
tied or removed quickly. If a rat caught in a trap is left
there, other rats may avoid the traps. A trapping strategy
also may include using live traps to remove these vermin.

Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests 4-3



Page 440: OUTSIDE BOOR

CUFF
OVER
CHANNEL

SLIGHT
os Db

aa

Ta i ir
me
ch fl til it

i za

ST SHEET METAL

Figure 4.5. Rodent Prevention [2]

Figure 4.6. Live Traps for Rats [5]

4-4 Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests

DIRECTION OF
RAT RUN

Figure 4.7. Kill Traps for Rats [2]

Cockroaches

Cockroaches have become well adapted to living with
and near humans, and their hardiness is legendary. In
light of these facts, cockroach control may become a
homeowner's most difficult task because of the time and
special knowledge it often involves. The cockroach is
considered an allergen source and an asthma trigger for
residents. Although little evidence exists to link the cock-
roach to specific disease outbreaks, it has bee demon-
strated to carry Salmonella typhimurium, Entamoeba
histolytica, and the poliomyelitis virus. In addition,
Kamble and Keith [6] note that most cockroaches pro-
duce a repulsive odor that can be detected in infested
areas. The sight of cockroaches can cause considerable
psychologic or emotional distress in some individuals.
They do not bite, but they do have heavy leg spines that
may scratch.

According to MPMH [2], there are 55 species of cock-
roaches in the United States. As a group, they tend to
prefer a moist, warm habitat because most are tropical in
origin. Although some tropical cockroaches feed only on
vegetation, cockroaches of public health interest tend to
live in structures and are customarily scavengers.
Cockroaches will eat a great variety of materials, includ-
ing cheese and bakery products, but they are especially
fond of starchy materials, sweet substances, and meat
products.

Cockroaches are primarily nocturnal. Daytime sightings
may indicate potentially heavy infestations. They tend to
hide in cracks and crevices and can move freely from
room to room or adjoining housing units via wall spaces,
plumbing, and other utility installations. Entry into
homes is often accomplished through food and beverage

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 441: boxes, grocery sacks, animal food, and household goods
carried into the home. The species of public health inter-
est that commonly inhabit human dwellings (Figures
4.84.13) include the following: German cockroach
(Blattella germanica); American cockroach (Periplaneta
americana); Oriental cockroach (Blatta orientalis); brown-
banded cockroach (Supella longipalpa); Australian cock-
roach (Periplaneta australasiae); smoky-brown cockroach
(Periplaneta fuliginosa); and brown cockroach (Periplaneta
brunnea).

Four management strategies exist for controlling cock-
roaches. The first is prevention. This strategy includes
inspecting items being carried into the home and sealing
cracks and crevices in kitchens, bathrooms, exterior
doors, and windows. Structural modifications would
include weather stripping and pipe collars. The second
strategy is sanitation. This denies cockroaches food,
water, and shelter. These efforts include quickly cleaning
food particles from shelving and floors; timely washing of
dinnerware; and routine cleaning under refrigerators,
stoves, furniture, and similar areas. If pets are fed indoors,
pet food should be stored in tight containers and not left
in bowls overnight. Litter boxes should be cleaned rou-
tinely. Access should be denied to water sources by fixing

<  Brown-banded

4 Oriental
American

Figure 4.8. American, Oriental, German, and Brown-banded
Cockroaches [7]

Figure 4.9. American Cockroaches, Various Stages and Ages [7]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Figure 4.12. Brown-banded Cockroaches, Various Stages and

Ages [7]

Figure 4.13. Wood Cockroach, Adult Male [7]

Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests

4-5



Page 442: leaking plumbing, drains, sink traps, and purging clutter,
such as papers and soiled clothing and rags. The third
strategy is trapping. Commercially available cockroach
traps can be used to capture roaches and serve as a moni-
toring device. The most effective trap placement is against
vertical surfaces, primarily corners, and under sinks, in
cabinets, basements, and floor drains. The fourth strategy
is chemical control. The use of chemicals typically indi-
cates that the other three strategies have been applied
incorrectly. Numerous insecticides are available and
appropriate information is obtainable from EPA.

Fleas

The most important fleas as disease vectors are those that
carry murine typhus and bubonic plague. In addition,
fleas serve as intermediate hosts for some species of dog
and rodent tapeworms that occasionally infest people.
They also may act as intermediate hosts of filarial worms
(heartworms) in dogs. In the United States, the most
important disease related to fleas is the bubonic plague.
This is primarily a concern of residents in the southwest-
ern and western parts of the country (Figure 4.14).

Of approximately 2,000 species of flea, the most com-
mon flea infesting both dogs and cats is the cat flea
Ctenocephalides felis. Although numerous animals, both
wild and domestic, can have flea infestations, it is from
the exposure of domestic dogs and cats that most home-
owners inherit flea infestation problems. According to
MPMH [2], fleas are wingless insects varying from 1 to
8% millimeters (mm) long, averaging 2 to 4 mm, and
feed through a siphon or tube. They are narrow and com-
pressed laterally with backwardly directed spines, which
adapt them for moving between the hairs and feathers of
mammals and birds. They have long, powerful legs
adapted for jumping. Both sexes feed on blood, and the
female requires a blood meal before she can produce via-
ble eggs. Fleas tend to be host-specific, thus feeding on
only one type of host. However, they will infest other
species in the absence of the favored host. They are found
in relative abundance on animals that live in burrows and
sheltered nests, while mammals and birds with no perma-
nent nests or that are exposed to the elements tend to
have light infestations.

MPMH [2] notes that fleas undergo complete metamor-
phosis (egg, larva, pupa, and adult). The time it takes to
complete the life cycle from egg to adult varies according
to the species, temperature, humidity, and food availabil-
ity. Under favorable conditions, some species can com-
plete a generation in as little as 2 or 3 weeks. Figure 4.15
shows the life cycle of the flea.

4-6 Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests

Reported Human Plague Cases by County:
U.S., 1970-1997

1 Case

2-5 Cases
6- 10 Cases
11-15 Cases

1G - 20 Cases

SESH

21 of more

Figure 4.14. Reported Human Plague Cases (1970-1997) [8]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 443: Flea eggs usually are laid singly or in small groups among
the feathers or hairs of the host or in a nest. They are
often laid in carpets of living quarters if the primary host
is a household pet. Eggs are smooth, spherical to oval,
light colored, and large enough to be seen with the naked
eye. An adult female flea can produce up to 2,000 eggs in
a lifetime. Flea larvae are small (2 to 5 mm), white, and
wormlike with a darker head and a body that will appear
brown if they have fed on flea feces. This stage is mobile
and will move away from light, thus they typically will be
found in shaded areas or under furniture. In 5 to 12 days,
they complete the three larval stages; however, this may
take several months depending on environmental condi-
tions. The larvae, after completing development, spin a
cocoon of silk encrusted with granules of sand or various
types of debris to form the pupal stage. The pupal stage
can be dormant for 140 to 170 days. In some areas of the
country, fleas can survive through the winter. The pupae,
after development, are stimulated to emerge as adults by
movement, pressure, or heat. The pupal form of the flea
is resistant to insecticides. An initial treatment, while kill-
ing egg, larvae, and adult forms, will not kill the pupae.
Therefore, a reapplication will often be necessary. The
adult forms are usually ready to feed about 24 hours after
they emerge from the cocoon and will begin to feed
within 10 seconds of landing on a host. Mating usually
follows the initial blood meal, and egg production is initi-
ated 24 to 48 hours after consuming a blood meal. The
adult flea lives approximately 100 days, depending on
environmental conditions.

Following are some guidelines for controlling fleas:

The most important principle in a total flea control
program is simultaneously treating all pets and their
environments (indoor and outdoor).

Before using insecticides, thoroughly clean the
environment, removing as many fleas as possible,
regardless of the form. This would include indoor
vacuuming and carpet steam cleaning. Special
attention should be paid to source points where pets
spend most of their time.

Outdoor cleanup should include mowing, yard
raking, and removing organic debris from flowerbeds
and under bushes.

Insecticide should be applied to the indoor and
outdoor environments and to the pet.

Reapplication to heavily infested source points in the
home and the yard may be needed to eliminate pre-
emerged adults.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Flies

The historical attitude of Western society toward flies has
been one of aesthetic disdain. The public health view is to
classify flies as biting or nonbiting. Biting flies include
sand flies, horseflies, and deerflies. Nonbiting flies include
houseflies, bottleflies, and screwworm flies. The latter
group is often referred to as synanthropic because of their
close association with humans. In general, the presence of
flies is a sign of poor sanitation. The primary concern of
most homeowners is nonbiting flies.

According to MPMH [2], the housefly (Musca domestica)
(Figure 4.16) is one of the most widely distributed
insects, occurring throughout the United States, and is
usually the predominant fly species in homes and restau-
rants. MM. domestica is also the most prominent human-asso-
ciated (synanthropic) fly in the southern United States.
Because of its close
association with
people, its abun-
dance, and its abil-
ity to transmit
disease, it is consid-
ered a greater threat
to human welfare
than any other spe- essen,
cies of nonbiting
fly. Each housefly
can easily carry more than 1 million bacteria on its body.
Some of the disease-causing agents transmitted by house-
flies to humans are Shigella spp. (dysentery and diarrhea =
shigellosis), Salmonella spp. (typhoid fever), Escherichia
coli, (traveler’s diarrhea), and Vibrio cholera (cholera).
Sometimes these organisms are carried on the fly’s tarsi or
body hairs, and frequently they are regurgitated onto
food when the fly attempts to liquefy it for ingestion.

Figure 4.16. Housefly [Musca domestica][9]

The fly life cycle is similar across the synanthropic group.
MPMH (2) notes that the egg and larval stages develop in
animal and vegetable refuse. Favorite breeding sites
include garbage, animal manure, spilled animal feed, and
soil contaminated with organic matter. Favorable environ-
mental conditions will result in the eggs hatching in 24
hours or less. Normally, a female fly will produce 500 to
600 eggs during her lifetime.

The creamy, white larvae (maggots) are about 2-inch
long when mature and move within the breeding material
to maintain optimum temperature and moisture condi-
tions. This stage lasts an average of 4 to 7 days in warm
weather. The larvae move to dry parts of the breeding
medium or move out of it onto the soil or sheltered

Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests 4-7



Page 444: places under debris to pupate, with this stage usually last-
ing 4 to 5 days. When the pupal stage is accomplished, the
adult fly exits the puparium, dries, hardens, and flies away to
feed, with mating occurring soon after emergence. Figure
4.17 demonstrates the typical fly life cycle.

The control of the housefly is hinged on good sanitation
(denying food sources and breeding sites to the fly). This
includes the proper disposal of food wastes by placing
garbage in cans with close-fitting lids. Cans need to be
periodically washed and cleaned to remove food debris.
The disposal of garbage in properly operated sanitary
landfills is paramount to fly control.

The presence of adult flies can be addressed in various
ways. Outside methods include limited placement of
common mercury vapor lamps that tend to attract flies.
Less-attractive sodium vapor lamps should be used near
the home. Self-closing doors in the home will deny
entrance, as will the use of proper-fitting and well-main-
tained screening on doors and windows.

Larger flies use homes for shelter from the cold, but do
not reproduce inside the home. Caulking entry points
and using fly swatters is effective and much safer than the
use of most pesticides. Insecticide “bombs” can be used in
attics and other rooms that can be isolated from the rest
of the house. However, these should be applied to areas
away from food, where flies rest.

The blowfly is a fairly large, metallic green, gray, blue,
bronze, or black fly. They may spend the winter in homes
or other protected sites, but will not reproduce during
this time. Blowflies breed most commonly on decayed
carcasses (e.g., dead squirrels, rodents, birds) and in drop-
pings of dogs or other pets during the summer; thus,
removal of these sources is imperative. Small animals, on
occasion, may die inside walls or under the crawl space of
a house. A week or two later, blowflies or maggots may
appear. The adult blowfly is also attracted to gas leaks.

4-8 Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests

Termites

According to Gold et al. [11], subterranean termites are
the most destructive insect pests of wood in the United
States, causing more than $2 billion in damage each year.
Annually, this is more property damage than that caused
by fire and windstorms combined. In the natural world,
these insects are beneficial because they break down dead
trees and other wood materials that would otherwise
accumulate. This biomass breakdown is recycled to the
soil as humus. MPMH [2], on the other hand, notes that
these insects can damage a building so severely it may
have to be replaced. Termites consume wood and other
cellulose products, such as paper, cardboard, and fiber-
board. They will also destroy structural timbers, pallets,
crates, furniture, and other wood products. In addition,
they will damage many materials they do not normally
eat as they search for food. The tunneling efforts of sub-
terranean termites can penetrate lead- and plastic-covered
electric cable and cause electrical system failure. In
nature, termites may live for years in tree stumps or lum-
ber beneath concrete buildings before they penetrate
hairline cracks in floors and walls, as well as expansion
joints, to search for food in areas such as interior door
frames and immobile furniture. Termite management
costs to homeowners are exceeded only by cockroach
control costs.

Lyon [12] notes that termites are frequently mistaken by
the homeowner as ants and often are referred to errone-
ously as white ants. Typical signs of termite infestations
occur in March through June and in September and
October. Swarming is an event where a group of adult
males and female reproductives leave the nest to establish
a new colony. If the emergence happens inside a building,
flying termites may constitute a considerable nuisance.
These pests can be collected with a vacuum cleaner or
otherwise disposed of without using pesticides. Each
homeowner should be aware of the following signs of ter-
mite infestation:

° Pencil-thin mud tubes extending over the inside and
outside surfaces of foundation walls, piers, sills, joists,
and similar areas (Figures 4.18 and 4.19).

e Presence of winged termites or their shed wings on
windowsills and along the edges of floors.

¢ Damaged wood hollowed out along the grain and
lined with bits of mud or soil. According to Oi et al.
[15], termite tubes and nests are made of mud and
carton. Carton is composed of partially chewed wood,
feces, and soil packed together. Tubes maintain the

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 445: high humidity required for survival, protect termites
from predators, and allow termites to move from one
spot to another.

Differentiating the ant from the dark brown or black ter-
mite reproductives can be accomplished by noting the
respective wings and body shape. MPMH [2] states that a
termite has four wings of about equal length and that the
wings are nearly twice as long as the body. By comparison, ant
wings that are only a little longer than the body and the
hind pair is much shorter than the front. Additionally,
ants typically have a narrow waist, with the abdomen
connected to the thorax by a thin petiole. Termites do
not have a narrow or pinched waist. Figure 4.20a and b
demonstrates the differences between the ant and termite.
Entomologists refer to winged ants and termites as alates.

Figure 4.21 shows the life cycle of the termite. In each
colony, there are three castes or forms of individuals
known as reproductives, workers, and soldiers. According

i

Figure 4.18. Termite Tube Extending from Ground to Wall [Red
Arrows] [13]

Figure 4.19. Termite Mud Shelter Tube Constructed Over a
Brick Foundation [14]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

to Lyon [12], the reproductives can be winged or wing-
less, with the latter found in colonies to serve as replace-
ments for the primary reproductives. The primary
reproductives (alates) vary in color from pale yellow-
brown to coal black, are Y2-inch to 34-inch in length, are
flattened dorsa-ventrally, and have pale or smoke-gray to
brown wings. The secondary reproductives have short
wing buds and are white to cream colored. The workers
are the same size as the primary reproductives and are
white to grayish-white, with a yellow-brown head, and are
wingless. In addition, the soldiers resemble workers, in
that they are wingless, but soldiers have large, rectangular,
yellowish, and brown heads with large jaws.

MPMH [2] states there are five families of termites found
in the world, with four of them occurring in the United
States. The families in the United States are
Hodotermitidae (rotten-wood termites), Kalotermitidae
(dry-wood termites), Rhinotermitidae (subterranean
termites) and Jermitidae (desert termites). Subterranean

Figure 4.20a. Ant (Elbowed Antennae: Fore Wings Larger Than Hind;
Constricted Waist) [16]

Figure 4.20b. Termite (Beaded Antennae; All Wings Equal) [16]

termites typically work in wood aboveground, but must
have direct contact with the ground to obtain moisture.
Nonsubterranean termites colonize above the ground and
feed on cellulose; however, their life cycles and methods
of attack, and consequently methods of control, are quite
different. Nonsubterranean termites in the United States
are commonly called drywood termites.

Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests 4-9



Page 446: In the United States, according to MPMH [2], native
subterranean termites are the most important and the
most common. These termites include the genus
Reticulitermes, occurring primarily in the continental
United States, and the genus Heterotermes, occurring in
the Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico, and the deserts of
California and Arizona. The appearance, habits, and type
of damage they cause are similar. The Formosan termite
(Coptotermes formosanus) is the newest species to become
established in the United States. It is a native of the
Pacific Islands and spread from Hawaii and Asia to the
United States during the 1960s. It is now found along the
Gulf Coast, in California, and in South Carolina, and is
expected to spread to other areas as well. Formosan ter-
mites cause greater damage than do native species because
of their more vigorous and aggressive behavior and their
ability to rapidly reproduce, build tubes and tunnels, and
seek out new items to infest. They have also shown more
resistance to some soil pesticides than native species.
Reproductives (swarmers) are larger than native species,
reaching up to %-inch in length, and are yellow to brown
in color. Swarmers have hairy-looking wings and swarm
after dusk, unlike native species, which swarm in the day-
time. Formosan soldiers have more oval-shaped heads
than do native species. On top of the head is an opening
that emits a sticky, whitish substance.

Dry-wood termites (Cryptotermes spp.) live entirely in
moderately to extremely dry wood. They require contact
with neither the soil nor any other moisture source and
may invade isolated pieces of furniture, fence posts, util-
ity poles, firewood, and structures. Dry-wood termite col-
onies are not as large as other species in the United States,
so they can occupy small wooden articles, which are one
way these insects spread to different locations. They are of
major economic importance in southern California,

4-10 Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests

Arizona, and along the Gulf Coast. The West Indian dry-
wood termite is a problem in Puerto Rico, the U.S.
Virgin Islands, Hawaii, parts of Florida and Louisiana,
and a number of U.S. Pacific Island territories. Dry-wood
termites are slightly larger than most other species, rang-
ing from 2 inch to % inch long, and are generally lighter
in color.

Damp-wood termites do not need contact with damp
ground like subterranean termites do, but they do require
higher moisture content in wood. However, once estab-
lished, these termites may extend into slightly drier wood.

Termites of minor importance are the tree-nesting groups.
The nests of these termites are found in trees, posts, and,
occasionally, buildings. Their aboveground nests are con-
nected to soil by tubes. Tree-nesting termites may be a
problem in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

The risk for encountering subterranean termites in the
United States is greater in the southeastern states and in
southwestern California. In the United States, the risk for
termite infestations tends to decrease as the latitude
increases northward.

Figure 4.22 portrays the geographic risk of subterranean
termites in the United States. Subterranean termites are
found in all states except Alaska and are most abundant
in the south and southeastern United States [18].

According to Potter [19], homeowners can reduce the risk
for termite attack by adhering to the following suggestions:

¢ Eliminate wood contact with the ground. Earth-to-
wood contact provides termites with simultaneous
access to food, moisture, and shelter in conjunction
with direct, hidden entry into the structure. In
addition, the homeowner or occupant should be aware
that pressure-treated wood is not immune to termite
attack because termites can enter through the cut ends
and build tunnels over the surfaces.

¢ Do not allow moisture to accumulate near the
home’s foundation. Proper drainage, repair of
plumbing, and proper grading will help to reduce the

presence of moisture, which attracts termites.

¢ Reduce humidity in crawl spaces. Most building
codes state that crawl space area should be vented at a
rate of 1 square foot per 150 square feet of crawl space
area. This rate can be reduced for crawl spaces
equipped with a polyethylene or equivalent vapor
barrier to one square foot per 300 to 500 square feet
of crawl space area. Vent placement design includes
positioning one vent within 3 feet of each building

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 447: corner. Trimming and controlling shrubs so that they
do not obstruct the vents is imperative. Installing a 4-
to 6-mil polyethylene sheeting over a minimum of
75% of the crawl space will reduce the crawl-space
moisture. Covering the entire floor of the crawl space
with such material can reduce two potential home
problems at one time: excess moisture and radon
(Chapter 5). The barrier will reduce the absorption of
moisture from the air and the release of moisture into
the air in the crawl space from the underlying soil.

Never store firewood, lumber, or other wood debris
against the foundation or inside the crawl space.
Termites are both attracted to and fed by this type of
storage. Wood stacked in contact with a dwelling and
vines, trellises, and dense plant material provide a
pathway for termites to bypass soil barrier treatment.

Use decorative wood chips and mulch sparingly.
Cellulose-containing products attract termites, especially
materials that have moisture-holding properties, such as
mulch. The homeowner should never allow these
products to contact wood components of the home.
The use of crushed stone or pea gravel is recommended
as being less attractive to termites and helpful in
diminishing other pest problems.

Figure 4.22. Subterranean Termite Risk in the United States [18]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Have the structure treated by a professional pest
control treatment. The final, and most effective,
strategy to prevent infestation is to treat the soil
around and beneath the building with termiticide. The
treated ground is then both a repellant and toxic to
termites.

Figure 4.23 demonstrates some typical points of attack by
subterranean termites and some faulty construction practices
that can contribute to subterranean termite infestations.

Lyon [12] notes the following alternative termite control
measures:

Nematodes. Certain species of parasitic round worms
(nematodes) will infest and kill termites and other soil
insects. Varying success has been experienced with this
method because it is dependent on several variables,
such as soil moisture and soil type.

Sand as a physical barrier. This would require
preconstruction planning and would depend on
termites being unable to manipulate the sand to create
tunnels. Some research in California and Hawaii has
indicated early success.

Oo None to slight

{BB Slight to moderate
BB Moderate to heavy
w@ Very heavy

Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests



Page 448: ¢ Chemical baits. This method uses wood or laminated
texture-flavored cellulose impregnated with a toxicant
and/or insect growth regulator. The worker termite
feeds on the substance and carries it back to the nest,
reducing or eliminating the entire colony. According
to HomeReports.com [20], an additional system is to
strategically place a series of baits around the house.
The intention is for termite colonies to encounter one
or more of the baits before approaching the house.
Once termite activity is observed, the bait wood is
replaced with a poison. The termites bring the poison
back to the colony and the colony is either eliminated
or substantially reduced. This system is relatively new
to the market. Its success depends heavily on the
termites finding the bait before finding and damaging
the house.

Additional measures include construction techniques that
discourage termite attacks, as demonstrated in Figure 4.24.
Termites often invade homes by way of the foundation,
either by crawling up the exterior surface where their
activity is usually obvious or by traveling inside hollow
block masonry. One way to deter their activity is to block
their access points on or through the foundation. Metal
termite shields have been used for decades to deter ter-
mite movement along foundation walls and piers on up
to the wooden structure. Metal termite shields should
extend 2 inches from the foundation and 2 inches down.

Improperly installed (i.e., not soldered/sealed properly),
damaged, or deteriorated termite shields may allow ter-
mites to reach parts of the wooden floor system. Shields
should be made of noncorroding metal and have no
cracks or gaps along the seams. If a house is being built
with metal termite shielding, the shielding should extend
at least 2 inches out and 2 inches down at a 45° angle from
the foundation wall. An alternative to using termite
shields on a hollow-block foundation is to fill the block
with concrete or put in a few courses of solid or concrete-
filled brick (which is often done anyway to level founda-
tions). These are referred to as masonry caps. The same
approach can be used with support piers in the crawl
space. Solid caps (i.e., a continuously poured concrete
cap) are best at stopping termites, but are not commonly
used. Concrete-filled brick caps should deter termite
movement or force them through small gaps, thus allow-
ing them to be spotted during an inspection [21].

Fire Ants

According to MPMH [2], ants are one of the most
numerous species on earth. Ants are in the same order as
wasps and bees and, because of their geographic distribu-
tion, they are universally recognized (Figure 4.25).

The life cycle of the fire ant begins with the mating of the
winged forms (alates) some 300 to 800 feet in the air,
typically occurring in the late spring or early summet.

Figure 4.23. Typical Points of Attack by Termites in the Home [2]

4-12 Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 449: The male dies after the mating; and the newly mated
queen finds a suitable moist site, drops her wings, and
burrows in the soil, sealing the opening behind her. Ants
undergo complete metamorphosis and, therefore, have
egg, larval, pupal and adult stages. The new queen will
begin laying eggs within 24 hours. Once fully developed,
she will produce approximately 1,600 eggs per day over a
maximum life span of 7 years. Soft, whitish, legless larvae
are produced from the hatching. These larvae are fed by
the worker ants. Pupae resemble adults in form, but are
soft, nonpigmented, and lack mobility. There are at least
three distinct castes of ants: workers, queens, and males.
Typically, the males have wings, which they retain until
death. Queens, the largest of the three castes, normally
have wings, but lose them after mating. The worker,
which is also a female, is never winged, except as a rare
abnormality. Within this hierarchy, mature colonies con-
tain males and females that are capable of flight and
reproduction. These are known as reproductives, and an
average colony may produce approximately 4,500 of these
per year. A healthy nest usually produces two nuptial
flights of reproductives each year and a healthy, mature
colony may contain more than 250,000 ants. Though
uncommon among ants, multiple queen colonies (10 to

100) occur somewhat frequently in fire ants, resulting in
more numerous mounds per acre.

There are many species of fire ants in the United States.
The most important are four species in the genus
Solenopsis. Of these, the number one fire ant pest is the
red imported fire ant (RIFA) Solenopsis invicta (Figure
4.25). This ant was imported inadvertently from South
America in the 1930s through the port of Mobile,
Alabama. RIFAs are now found in more than 275 million
acres in 11 southern states and Puerto Rico. The second
most important species is the black imported fire ant, S.
richteri, which was introduced into the United States in
the 1920s from Argentina or Uruguay. It is currently lim-
ited in distribution to a small area of northern
Mississippi and Alabama. There are two native species
of fire ants: the tropical or native fire ant, S. geminata,
ranging from South Carolina to Florida and west to
Texas; and the Southern fire ant, S. xyloni, which occurs
from North Carolina south to northern Florida, along the
Gulf Coast, and west to California. The most important
extension of the RIFA range is thought to have occurred
during the 1950s housing boom as a result of the trans-
portation of sod and nursery plants (Figure 4.26).

Key to Figure 4.23

Cracks in foundation permit hidden points of entry

from soil to sill.

Posts through concrete in contact with substructural
. Watch door frames and intermediate supporting

posts.

Wood-framing members in contact with earthfill under

concrete slab.

Form boards left in place contribute to termite food
supply.

Leaking pipes and dripping faucets sustain soil mois-

ture. Excess irrigation has same effect.

Shrubbery blocking air flow through vent:
upports termite colony until large population
ructure.

Heating unit accelerates termite development by main-

taining warmth of colony on a year-round bas

Foundation wall too low permits wood to contact
soil. Adding topsoil often buil
sill level.

xterior grade up to

0. Footing too low or soil thrown against it causes wood-
soil contact. There should be 8 inches of clean concrete
between soil and pier block.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

. Stucco carried down over concrete foundation permits
hidden entrance between stucco and foundation if
bond fails.
2. Insufficient clearance for inspection also permits easy

construction of termite shelter tubes from soil to wood.
3. Wood framing of crawl hole forming wood-soil contact.
4. Mud sill and/or posts in contact with soil.

5. Wood siding and skirting form soil contact. There
should be a minimum of 3 inches clearance between
skirting and soil.

9. Porch steps in contact with soil. ) watch for ladders

and other wooden materials.

from

7. Downspouts should carry water a
the building.

. Improper maintenance of soil piled against pier footi
so makes careful inspection impossible.

and foundation wall. Should

have a 1-inch free air space on both sides and end and

9. Wall girder entering rec

be protected with a moisture-impervious seal.

. Vents placed between joists tunnel air through space
without providing good substructural aeration. Vents
placed in foundation wall give better air circulation.

4-13

Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests



Page 450: Brick
Veneer

Termite shields .

Finished
grade

Hollow concrete
block wall

Girders

Masonry
pier

Figure 4.24. Construction Techniques That Discourage Termite Attacks: Thin Metal Termite Shield Should Extend 2 Inches Beyond Foundation and 2

Inches Down [2]

Figure 4.25. Fire Ants [22]

RIFAs prefer open and sun-exposed areas. They are found
in cultivated fields, cemeteries, parks, and yards, and even
inside cars, trucks, and recreational vehicles. RIFAs are
attracted to electrical currents and are known to nest in
and around heat pumps, junction boxes, and similar
areas. They are omnivorous; thus they will attack most
things, living or dead. Their economic effects are felt by
their destruction of the seeds, fruit, shoots, and seedlings
of numerous native plant species. Fire ants are known to
tend pests, such as scale insects, mealy bugs, and aphids,
for feeding on their sweet waste excretion (honeydew).

4-14 Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests

RIFAs transport these insects to new feeding sites and
protect them from predators. The positive side of RIFA
infestation is that the fire ant is a predator of ticks and
controls the ground stage of horn flies.

The urban dweller with a RIFA infestation may find sig-
nificant damage to landscape plants, with reductions in
the number of wild birds and mammals. RIFAs can dis-
courage outdoor activities and be a threat to young ani-
mals or small confined pets. RIFA nests typically are not
found indoors, but around homes, roadways, and struc-
tures, as well as under sidewalks. Shifting of soil after
RIFAs abandon sites has resulted in collapsing structures.
Figure 4.27 shows a fire ant mound with fire ants and a
measure of their relative size.

The medical complications of fire ant stings have been
noted in the literature since 1957. People with disabilities,
reduced feeling in their feet and legs, young children, and
those with mobility issues are at risk for sustaining
numerous stings before escaping or receiving assistance.
Fatalities have resulted from attacks on the elderly and on
infants. Control of the fire ant is primarily focused on the
mound by using attractant bait consisting of soybean oil,
corn grits, or chemical agents. The bait is picked up by
the worker ants and taken deep into the mound to the
queen. These products typically require weeks to work.

Individual mound treatment is usually most effective in
the spring. The key is to locate and treat all mounds in

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 451: Range Expansion of RIFA in the U.S. From 1918-1998

|

a
*
= e

‘
\

HB io19-1930, BR 196-1974

1931 WE 1975-1984

BH 1939 BB i9ss-1994

(0) 1949-1953 1995-1998

BE i958 * 1998 Isolated Infestations

BB 1959-1964 Not Infested

Figure 4.26. Range Expansion of Red Imported Fire Ants [RIFAs] in the United States, 1918-1998 [23]

the area to be protected. If young mounds are missed, the
area can become reinfested in less than a year.

Mosquitoes

All mosquitoes have four stages of development—egg,
larva, pupa, and adult—and spend their larval and pupal
stages in water. The females of some mosquito species
deposit eggs on moist surfaces, such as mud or fallen
leaves, that may be near water but dry. Later, rain or high
tides reflood these surfaces and stimulate the eggs to
hatch into larvae. The females of other species deposit
their eggs directly on the surface of still water in such
places as ditches, street catch basins, tire tracks, streams
that are drying up, and fields or excavations that hold
water for some time. This water is often stagnant and
close to the home in discarded tires, ornamental pools,
unused wading and swimming pools, tin cans, bird baths,
plant saucers, and even gutters and flat roofs. The eggs
soon hatch into larvae. In the hot summer months, larvae
grow rapidly, become pupae, and emerge 1 week later as
flying adult mosquitoes. A few important spring species
have only one generation per year. However, most species
have many generations per year, and their rapid increase
in numbers becomes a problem.

When adult mosquitoes emerge from the aquatic stages,
they mate, and the female seeks a blood meal to obtain

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

the protein necessary for the development of her eggs.
The females of a few species may produce a first batch of
eggs without this first blood meal. After a blood meal is
digested and the eggs are laid, the female mosquito again
seeks a blood meal to produce a second batch of eggs.
Depending on her stamina and the weather, she may
repeat this process many times without mating again. The
male mosquito does not take a blood meal, but may feed
on plant nectar. He lives for only a short time after mat-
ing. Most mosquito species survive the winter, or over-
winter, in the egg stage, awaiting the spring thaw, when

ie a

Figure 4.27.

Fire Ant Mound
Source: CAPT Craig Shepherd, U.S. PHS; used with permission.

Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests 4-15



Page 452: waters warm and the eggs hatch. A few important species
spend the winter as adult, mated females, resting in pro-
tected, cool locations, such as cellars, sewers, crawl spaces,
and well pits. With warm spring days, these females seek
a blood meal and begin the cycle again. Only a few spe-
cies can overwinter as larvae.

Mosquitoborne diseases, such as malaria and yellow fever,
have plagued civilization for thousands of years. Newer threats
include Lyme disease and West Nile virus. Organized mosquito
control in the United States has greatly reduced the inci-
dence of these diseases. However, mosquitoes can still
transmit a few diseases, including eastern equine encephalitis
and St. Louis encephalitis. The frequency and extent of
these diseases depend on a complex series of factors.
Mosquito control agencies and health departments cooperate
in being aware of these factors and reducing the chance
for disease. It is important to recognize that young adult
female mosquitoes taking their first blood meal do not
transmit diseases. It is instead the older females, who, if they
have picked up a disease organism in their first blood meals,
can then transmit the disease during the second blood meal.

The proper method to manage the mosquito problem in
a community is through an organized integrated pest man-
agement system that includes all approaches that safely man-
age the problem. The spraying of toxic agents is but one of
many approaches.

When mosquitoes are numerous and interfere with living,
recreation, and work, you can use the various measures
described in the following paragraphs to reduce their
annoyance, depending on location and conditions.

How to Reduce the Mosquito Population

The most efficient method of controlling mosquitoes is
by reducing the availability of water suitable for larval
and pupal growth. Large lakes, ponds, and streams that have
waves, contain mosquito-eating fish, and lack aquatic veg-
etation around their edges do not contain mosquitoes;
mosquitoes thrive in smaller bodies of water in protected
places. Examine your home and neighborhood and take the
following precautions recommended by the New Jersey
Agricultural Experiment Station [24]:

° dispose of unwanted tin cans and tires;
* clean clogged roof gutters and drain flat roofs;

* turn over unused wading pools and other containers
that tend to collect rainwater;

* change water in birdbaths, fountains, and troughs
twice a week;

4-16 Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests

* clean and chlorinate swimming pools;

* cover containers tightly with window screen or plastic
when storing rainwater for garden use during drought
periods;

° flush sump-pump pits weekly; and
* stock ornamental pools with fish.

If mosquito breeding is extensive in areas such as woodland
pools or roadside ditches, the problem may be too great
for individual residents. In such cases, call the organized
mosquito control agency in your area. These agencies
have highly trained personnel who can deal with the
problem effectively.

Several commercially available insecticides can be effective
in controlling larval and adult mosquitoes. These chemicals
are considered sufficiently safe for use by the public.
Select a product whose label states that the material is
effective against mosquito larvae or adults. For safe and
effective use, read the label and follow the instructions for
applying the material. The label lists those insects that the
EPA agrees are effectively controlled by the product.

For use against adult mosquitoes, some liquid insecticides
can be mixed according to direction and sprayed lightly
on building foundations, hedges, low shrubbery, ground
covers, and grasses. Do not overapply liquid insecticides—
excess spray drips from the sprayed surfaces to the ground,
where it is ineffective. The purpose of such sprays is to
leave a fine deposit of insecticide on surfaces where mosquitoes
rest. Such sprays are not effective for more than 1 or 2 days.

Some insecticides are available as premixed products or
aerosol cans. These devices spray the insecticide as very
small aerosol droplets that remain floating in the air and
hit the flying mosquitoes. Apply the sprays upwind, so
the droplets drift through the area where mosquito con-
trol is desired. Rather than applying too much of these
aerosols initially, it is more practical to apply them briefly
but periodically, thereby eliminating those mosquitoes
that recently flew into the area.

Various commercially available repellents can be pur-
chased as a cream or lotion or in pressurized cans, then
applied to the skin and clothing. Some manufacturers also
offer clothing impregnated with repellents; coarse, repel-
lent-bearing particles to be scattered on the ground; and
candles whose wicks can be lit to release a repellent chem-
ical. The effectiveness of all repellents varies from location
to location, from person to person, and from mosquito to
mosquito. Repellents can be especially effective in recre-
ation areas, where mosquito control may not be con-

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 453: ducted. All repellents should be used according to the
manufacturers’ instructions. Mosquitoes are attracted by
perspiration, warmth, body odor, carbon dioxide, and
light. Mosquito control agencies use some of these attrac-
tants to help determine the relative number of adult mos-
quitoes in an area. Several devices are sold that are
supposed to attract, trap, and destroy mosquitoes and
other flying insects. However, if these devices are attrac-
tive to mosquitoes, they probably attract more mosqui-
toes into the area and may, therefore, increase rather than
decrease mosquito annoyance.

References

1. Barnett DB. Vectors and their control. In: Morgan MT,
editor. Environmental health. 3rd ed. Englewood, CO:
Wadsworth Publishing Co.; 2002. p. 137-50.

2. Armed Forces Pest Management Board. Military pest
management handbook. Washington, DC: Armed Forces
Pest Management Board; no date. Available from URL:
http://www.afpmb.org/ MPMH/toc.htm.

3. Indiana Department of Natural Resources. Rodent
pictures. Lafayette, IN: Indiana Department of Natural
Resources; no date. Available from URL: http://www.
entm.purdue.edu/ wildlife/rat_pictures.htm.

4. Arrow Services, Inc. Rats: roof rats. Plymouth, IN: Arrow
Services, Inc.; no date. Available from URL: http:/Avww.
arrowpestcontrol.com/pages/rod/roofpic.html.

5. Cobb County Extension Service. Fact sheet on rodents:
rats and mice. Marietta, GA: Cobb County Extension
Service; 2003. Available from URL: http://www.griffin.
peachnet.edu/ga/cobb/Horticulture/Factsheets/

peskycritters/ratsmice.htm.

6. Kamble ST; Keith DL. Cockroaches and their control.
Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Cooperative
Extension; 1995.

7. University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Cockroach picture gallery.
Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska-Lincoln; no date.
Available from URL: http://pested.unl.edu/roachind.htm.

8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Reported
human plague cases by county: United States, 1970-1997.
Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human Services;

no date. Available from URL: http://www.cde.gov/ncidod/
dvbid/plague/plagwest.htm.

9. Leslie M, editor. Netwatch: flys in the Web. Science
2004;306:1269. Available from URL: http://www.sel.barc.
usda.gov/diptera/names/images/ science1104.pdf.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

10.

11.

12.

13.

14,

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

Oderkirk A. Fly control in poultry barns: poultry fact
sheet. Truro, Nova Scotia, Canada: Nova Scotia
Department of Agriculture and Marketing; 2001.

Gold RE, Howell HN Jr, Glenn GJ. Subterranean
termites. College Station, TX: Texas Agricultural
Extension Service; 1999. Available from URL:
htp://insects.tamu.edu/extension/bulletins/b6080.html.

Lyon WE Termite control: HYG-2092-03. Columbus,
OH: The Ohio State University Extension; 2003.
Available from URL: http://ohioline.osu.edu/
hyg-fact/2000/2092.html.

Austin AR. Sample photos of structural foundation defects
and deficiences. Houston: Diligent Home Inspections; no

date.

Fumapest Group. Western subterranean termites. Revesby,
New South Wales, Australia: Fumapest Group Pty.; no
date. Available from URL: http://www.termite.com/

termites/western-subterranean-termite.html.

Oi FM, Castner JL, Koehler PG. The Eastern
subterranean termite. Gainesville, FL: University of Florida
Cooperative Extension Service; 1997. Available from
URL: http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/BODY_IN031.

Ferster B, Deyrup M, Scheffrahn RH. How to tell the
difference between ant and termite alates. Fort Lauderdale,
FL: University of Florida; no date. Available from URL:
hetp://flrec.ifas.ufl.edu/entomo/ants/
Ant%20vs%20Termite.htm.

Su N-Y. Life cycle of the Formosan subterranean termite,
Coptotermes formosanus Shiraki. Gainesville, FL: University
of Florida; no date. Available from URL: http://creatures.
ifas.ufl.edu/urban/termites/fst10.htm.

Suiter DR, Jones SC, Forschler BT. Biology of
subterranean termites in the Eastern United States.
Bulletin 1209. Columbus, OH: The Ohio State
University Extension; no date. Available from URL:
hutp://ohioline.osu.edu/b1209/.

Potter ME Protecting your home against termites.
Lexington, KY: University of Kentucky Department of
Entomology; 2004. Available from URL: http://www.uky.
edu/Agriculture/Entomology/entfacts/struct/ef605.htm.

HomeReports.com. Pest and termite control companies.
Atlanta: HomeReports.com; no date. Available from
URL: http://www.homereports.com/ge/ PestControl.htm.

North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service. Termite
prevention: approaches for new construction. Raleigh,

Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests 4-17



Page 454: 22,

23.

24.

NC: North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service; no
date. Available from URL: http://www.ces.ncsu.edu/depts/

ent/notes/Urban/termites/pre-con.htm.

Core J. Update: hot on the trail of fire ants. Agric Res
2003; 51:20-23. Available from URL: http://ars.usda. gov/
is/AR/archive/Feb03/ants0203.htm.

California Department of Food and Agriculture. First
reported occurrence of red imported fire ant; Solenopsis
invicta. Sacramento, CA: California Department of Food.
and Agriculture; no date. Available from URL: www.cdfa.
ca.gov/phpps/pdep/rifa/html/english/facts/rifaTIME.htm.

Sutherland DJ, Crans WJ. Mosquitoes in your life. New
Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station Publication
SA220-5M-86. New Brunswick, NJ: New Jersey
Agricultural Experiment Station, Cook College, Rutgers,
The State University of New Jersey; no date. Available at
URL: http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/~insects/moslife.htm.

4-18 Chapter 4: Disease Vectors and Pests

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 455: Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials

“Walking into a modern building can sometimes be com-
pared to placing your head inside a plastic bag that is filled
with toxic fumes.”

John Bower
Founder, Healthy House Institute

Introduction

We all face a variety of risks to our health as we go about
our day-to-day lives. Driving in cars, flying in airplanes,
engaging in recreational activities, and being exposed to
environmental pollutants all pose varying degrees of risk.
Some risks are simply unavoidable. Some we choose to
accept because to do otherwise would restrict our ability
to lead our lives the way we want. Some are risks we
might decide to avoid if we had the opportunity to make
informed choices. Indoor air pollution and exposure to
hazardous substances in the home are risks we can do
something about.

In the last several years, a growing body of scientific evi-
dence has indicated that the air within homes and other
buildings can be more seriously polluted than the out-
door air in even the largest and most industrialized cities.
Other research indicates that people spend approximately
90% of their time indoors. Thus, for many people, the
risks to health from exposure to indoor air pollution may
be greater than risks from outdoor pollution.

In addition, people exposed to indoor air pollutants for
the longest periods are often those most susceptible to
their effects. Such groups include the young, the elderly,
and the chronically ill, especially those suffering from
respiratory or cardiovascular disease [1].

Indoor Air Pollution

Numerous forms of indoor air pollution are possible in
the modern home. Air pollutant levels in the home
increase if not enough outdoor air is brought in to dilute
emissions from indoor sources and to carry indoor air
pollutants out of the home. In addition, high tempera-
ture and humidity levels can increase the concentration of
some pollutants. Indoor pollutants can be placed into

two groups, biologic and chemical.

Biologic Pollutants

Biologic pollutants include bacteria, molds, viruses, ani-
mal dander, cat saliva, dust mites, cockroaches, and pol-
len. These biologic pollutants can be related to some

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

serious health effects. Some biologic pollutants, such as
measles, chickenpox, and influenza are transmitted
through the air. However, the first two are now prevent-
able with vaccines. Influenza virus transmission, although
vaccines have been developed, still remains of concern in
crowded indoor conditions and can be affected by venti-
lation levels in the home.

Common pollutants, such as pollen, originate from plants
and can elicit symptoms such as sneezing, watery eyes,
coughing, shortness of breath, dizziness, lethargy, fever,
and digestive problems. Allergic reactions are the result of
repeated exposure and immunologic sensitization to par-
ticular biologic allergens.

Although pollen allergies can be bothersome, asthmatic
responses to pollutants can be life threatening. Asthma is
a chronic disease of the airways that causes recurrent and
distressing episodes of wheezing, breathlessness, chest
tightness, and coughing [2]. Asthma can be broken down
into two groups based on the causes of an attack: extrin-
sic (allergic) and intrinsic (nonallergic). Most people with
asthma do not fall neatly into either type, but somewhere
in between, displaying characteristics of both classifica-
tions. Extrinsic asthma has a known cause, such as aller-
gies to dust mites, various pollens, grass or weeds, or pet
danders. Individuals with extrinsic asthma produce an
excess amount of antibodies when exposed to triggers.
Intrinsic asthma has a known cause, but the connection
between the cause and the symptoms is not clearly under-
stood. There is no antibody hypersensitivity in intrinsic
asthma. Intrinsic asthma usually starts in adulthood with-
out a strong family history of asthma. Some of the known
triggers of intrinsic asthma are infections, such as cold
and flu viruses, exercise and cold air, industrial and occu-
pational pollutants, food additives and preservatives,
drugs such as aspirin, and emotional stress. Asthma is
more common in children than in adults, with nearly 1
of every 13 school-age children having asthma [3]. Low-
income African-Americans and certain Hispanic popula-
tions suffer disproportionately, with urban inner cities
having particularly severe problems. The impact on
neighborhoods, school systems, and health care facilities
from asthma is severe because one-third of all pediatric
emergency room visits are due to asthma, and it is the
fourth most prominent cause of physician office visits.
Additionally, it is the leading cause of school absentee-
ism—14 million school days lost each year—from
chronic illness [4]. The U.S. population, on the average,

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials 5-1



Page 456: spends as much as 90% of its time indoors. Consquently,
allergens and irritants from the indoor environment may
play a significant role in triggering asthma episodes. A
number of indoor environmental asthma triggers are bio-
logic pollutants. These can include rodents (discussed in
Chapter 4), cockroaches, mites, and mold.

Cockroaches

The droppings, body parts, and saliva of cockroaches can
be asthma triggers. Cockroaches are commonly found in
crowded cities and in the southern United States.
Allergens contained in the feces and saliva of cockroaches
can cause allergic reactions or trigger asthma symptoms.
A national study by Crain et al. [5] of 994 inner-city
allergic children from seven U.S. cities revealed that
cockroaches were reported in 58% of the homes. The
Community Environmental Health Resource Center
reports that cockroach debris, such as body parts and old
shells, trigger asthma attacks in individuals who are
sensitized to cockroach allergen [6]. Special attention to
cleaning must be a priority after eliminating the presence
of cockroaches to get rid of the presence of any allergens left
that can be asthma triggers.

House Dust Mites

Another group of arthropods linked to asthma is house
dust mites. In 1921, a link was suggested between
asthmatic symptoms and house dust, but it was not until
1964 that investigators suggested that a mite could be
responsible. Further investigation linked a number of mite
species to the allergen response and revealed that humid
homes have more mites and, subsequently, more
allergens. In addition, researchers established that fecal
pellets deposited by the mites accumulated in home
fabrics and could become airborne via domestic activities
such as vacuuming and dusting, resulting in inhalation by
the inhabitants of the home. House dust mites are
distributed worldwide, with a minimum of 13 species
identified from house dust. The two most common in
the United States are the North American house dust
mite (Dermatophagoides farinae) and the European house
dust mite (D. pteronyssinus). According to Lyon [7], house
dust mites thrive in homes that provide a source of food
and shelter and adequate humidity. Mites prefer relative
humidity levels of 70% to 80% and temperatures of 75°F
to 80°F (24°C to 27°C). Most mites are found in
bedrooms in bedding, where they spend up to a third of
their lives. A typical used mattress may have from
100,000 to 10 million mites in it. In addition, carpeted
floors, especially long, loose pile carpet, provide a
microhabitat for the accumulation of food and moisture

5-2 Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials

for the mite, and also provide protection from removal by
vacuuming. The house dust mite’s favorite food is human
dander (skin flakes), which are shed at a rate of
approximately 0.20 ounces per week.

A good microscope and a trained observer are imperative
in detecting mites. House dust mites also can be detected
using diagnostic tests that measure the presence and
infestation level of mites by combining dust samples
collected from various places inside the home with
indicator reagents [7]. Assuming the presence of mites,
the precautions listed below should be taken if people
with asthma are present in the home:

° Use synthetic rather than feather and down pillows.

¢ Use an approved allergen barrier cover to enclose the
top and sides of mattresses and pillows and the base of

the bed.

¢ Use a damp cloth to dust the plastic mattress cover
daily.
¢ Change bedding and vacuum the bed base and

mattress weekly.

Use nylon or cotton cellulose blankets rather than
wool blankets.
U

se hot (120°F—130°F [49°C-54°C]) water to wash all

bedding, as well as room curtains.

¢ Eliminate or reduce fabric wall hangings, curtains, and
drapes.

¢ Use wood, tile, linoleum, or vinyl floor covering rather
than carpet. If carpet is present, vacuum regularly with
a high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) vacuum or a
household vacuum with a microfiltration bag.

¢ Purchase stuffed toys that are machine washable.

° Use fitted sheets to help reduce the accumulation of
human skin on the mattress surface.

HEPA vacuums are now widely available and have also
been shown to be effective [8]. A conventional vacuum
tends to be inefficient as a control measure and results in
a significant increase in airborne dust concentrations, but
can be used with multilayer microfiltration collection
bags. Another approach to mite control is reducing
indoor humidity to below 50% and installing central
air conditioning.

Two products are available to treat house dust mites and
their allergens. These products contain the active
ingredients benzyl benzoate and tannic acid.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 457: Pets

According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) [9], pets can be significant asthma triggers because
of dead skin flakes, urine, feces, saliva, and hair. Proteins
in the dander, urine, or saliva of warm-blooded animals
can sensitize individuals and lead to allergic reactions or
trigger asthmatic episodes. Warm-blooded animals include
dogs, cats, birds, and rodents (hamsters, guinea pigs,
gerbils, rats, and mice). Numerous strategies, such as the
following, can diminish or eliminate animal allergens in
the home:

¢ Eliminate animals from the home.

¢ Thoroughly clean the home (including floors and
walls) after animal removal.

¢ If pets must remain in the home, reduce pet exposure
in sleeping areas. Keep pets away from upholstered
furniture, carpeted areas, and stuffed toys, and keep the
pets outdoors as much as possible.

However, there is some evidence that pets introduced early
into the home may prevent asthma. Several studies have
shown that exposure to dogs and cats in the first year of
life decreases a child’s chances of developing allergies [10]
and that exposure to cats significantly decreases sensitivity
to cats in adulthood [11]. Many other studies have shown
a decrease in allergies and asthma among children who
grew up on a farm and were around many animals [12].

Mold

People are routinely exposed to more than 200 species of
fungi indoors and outdoors [13]. These include moldlike
fungi, as well as other fungi such as yeasts and mush-
rooms. The terms “mold” and “mildew” are nontechnical
names commonly used to refer to any fungus that is grow-
ing in the indoor environment. Mold colonies may appear
cottony, velvety, granular, or leathery, and may be white,
gray, black, brown, yellow, greenish, or other colors. Many
reproduce via the production and dispersion of spores.
They usually feed on dead organic matter and, provided
with sufficient moisture, can live off of many materials
found in homes, such as wood, cellulose in the paper
backing on drywall, insulation, wallpaper, glues used to
bond carpet to its backing, and everyday dust and dirt.

Certain molds can cause a variety of adverse human
health effects, including allergic reactions and immune
responses (e.g., asthma), infectious disease (e.g., histoplas-
mosis), and toxic effects (e.g., aflatoxin-induced liver can-
cer from exposure to this mold-produced toxin in food)
[14]. A recent Institute of Medicine (IOM) review of the
scientific literature found sufficient evidence for an associ-

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

ation between exposure to mold or other agents in damp
indoor environments and the following conditions: upper
respiratory tract symptoms, cough, wheeze, hypersensitiv-
ity pneumonitis in susceptible persons, and asthma symp-
toms in sensitized persons [15]. A previous scientific
review was more specific in concluding that sufficient evi-
dence exists to support associations between fungal aller-
gen exposure and asthma exacerbation and upper
respiratory disease [13]. Finally, mold toxins can cause
direct lung damage leading to pulmonary diseases other
than asthma [13].

The topic of residential mold has received increasing pub-
lic and media attention over the past decade. Many news
stories have focused on problems associated with “toxic
mold” or “black mold,” which is often a reference to the
toxin-producing mold, Stachybotrys chartarum. This
might give the impression that mold problems in homes
are more frequent now than in past years; however, no
good evidence supports this. Reasons for the increasing
attention to this issue include high-visibility lawsuits
brought by property owners against builders and develop-
ers, scientific controversies regarding the degree to which
specific illness outbreaks are mold-induced, and an
increase in the cost of homeowner insurance policies due
to the increasing number of mold-related claims. Modern
construction might be more vulnerable to mold problems
because tighter construction makes it more difficult for
internally generated water vapor to escape, as well as the
widespread use of paper-backed drywall in construction
(paper is an excellent medium for mold growth when
wet), and the widespread use of carpeting.

Allergic Health Effects. Many molds produce numerous
protein or glycoprotein allergens capable of causing aller-
gic reactions in people. These allergens have been mea-
sured in spores as well as in other fungal fragments. An
estimated 6%-10% of the general population and 15%-
50% of those who are genetically susceptible are sensi-
tized to mold allergens [13]. Fifty percent of the 937
children tested in a large multicity asthma study spon-
sored by the National Institutes of Health showed sensi-
tivity to mold, indicating the importance of mold as an
asthma trigger among these children [16]. Molds are
thought to play a role in asthma in several ways. Molds
produce many potentially allergenic compounds, and
molds may play a role in asthma via release of irritants
that increase potential for sensitization or release of toxins
(mycotoxins) that affect immune response [13].

Toxics and Irritants. Many molds also produce mycotox-
ins that can be a health hazard on ingestion, dermal con-
tact, or inhalation [14]. Although common outdoor

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials 5-3



Page 458: molds present in ambient air, such as Cladosporium clado-
sporioides and Alternaria alternata, do not usually produce
toxins, many other different mold species do [17].
Genera-producing fungi associated with wet buildings,
such as Aspergillus versicolor, Fusarium verticillivides,
Penicillium aiurantiorisen, and S. chartarum, can produce
potent toxins [17]. A single mold species may produce
several different toxins, and a given mycotoxin may be
produced by more than one species of fungi.
Furthermore, toxin-producing fungi do not necessarily
produce mycotoxins under all growth conditions, with
production being dependent on the substrate it is metab-
olizing, temperature, water content, and humidity [17].
Because species of toxin-producing molds generally have
a higher water requirement than do common household
molds, they tend to thrive only under conditions of
chronic and severe water damage [18]. For example,
Stachybotrys typically only grows under continuously wet
conditions [19]. It has been suggested that very young
children may be especially vulnerable to certain mycotox-
ins [19,20]. For example, associations have been reported
for pulmonary hemorrhage (bleeding lung) deaths in
infants and the presence of S. chartarum [21-24].

Causes of Mold. Mold growth can be caused by any con-
dition resulting in excess moisture. Common moisture
sources include rain leaks (e.g., on roofs and wall joints);
surface and groundwater leaks (e.g., poorly designed or
clogged rain gutters and footing drains, basement leaks);
plumbing leaks; and stagnant water in appliances (e.g.,
dehumidifiers, dishwashers, refrigerator drip pans, and
condensing coils and drip pans in HVAC systems).
Moisture problems can also be due to water vapor migra-
tion and condensation problems, including uneven
indoor temperatures, poor air circulation, soil air entry
into basements, contact of humid unconditioned air with
cooled interior surfaces, and poor insulation on indoor
chilled surfaces (e.g., chilled water lines). Problems can
also be caused by the production of excess moisture
within homes from humidifiers, unvented clothes dryers,
overcrowding, etc. Finished basements are particularly
susceptible to mold problems caused by the combination
of poorly controlled moisture and mold-supporting mate-
rials (e.g., carpet, paper-backed sheetrock) [15]. There is
also some evidence that mold spores from damp or wet
crawl spaces can be transported through air currents into
the upper living quarters. Older, substandard housing low
income families can be particularly prone to mold prob-
lems because of inadequate maintenance (e.g., inoperable
gutters, basement and roof leaks), overcrowding, inade-
quate insulation, lack of air conditioning, and poor heat-
ing. Low interior temperatures (e.g., when one or two

5-4 Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials

rooms are left unheated) result in an increase in the rela-
tive humidity, increasing the potential for water to con-
dense on cold surfaces.

Mold Assessment Methods. Mold growth or the poten-
tial for mold growth can be detected by visual inspection
for active or past microbial growth, detection of musty
odors, and inspection for water staining or damage. If it is
not possible or practical to inspect a residence, this infor-
mation can be obtained using occupant questionnaires.
Visual observation of mold growth, however, is limited by
the fact that fungal elements such as spores are micro-
scopic, and that their presence is often not apparent until
growth is extensive and the fact that growth can occur in
hidden spaces (e.g., wall cavities, air ducts).

Portable, hand-held moisture meters, for the direct mea-

surement of moisture levels in materials, may also be use-
ful in qualitative home assessments to aid in pinpointing
areas of potential biologic growth that may not otherwise
be obvious during a visual inspection [14].

For routine assessments in which the goal is to identify
possible mold contamination problems before remedia-
tion, it is usually unnecessary to collect and analyze air or
settled dust samples for mold analysis because decisions
about appropriate intervention strategies can typically be
made on the basis of a visual inspection [25]. Also, sam-
pling and analysis costs can be relatively high and the
interpretation of results is not straightforward. Air and
dust monitoring may, however, be necessary in certain sit-
uations, including 1) if an individual has been diagnosed
with a disease associated with fungal exposure through
inhalation, 2) if it is suspected that the ventilation systems
are contaminated, or 3) if the presence of mold is sus-
pected but cannot be identified by a visual inspection or
bulk sampling [26]. Generally, indoor environments con-
tain large reservoirs of mold spores in settled dust and
contaminated building materials, of which only a rela-
tively small amount is airborne at a given time.

Common methods for sampling for mold growth include
bulk sampling techniques, air sampling, and collection of
settled dust samples. In bulk sampling, portions of mate-
rials with visual or suspected mold growth (e.g., sections
of wallboard, pieces of duct lining, carpet segments, or
return air filters) are collected and directly examined to
determine if mold is growing and to identify the mold
species or groups that are present. Surface sampling in
mold contamination investigations may also be used when
a less destructive technique than bulk sampling is desired.
For example, nondestructive samples of mold may be col-
lected using a simple swab or adhesive tape [14].

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 459: Air can also be sampled for mold using pumps that pull
air across a filter medium, which traps airborne mold
spores and fragments. It is generally recommended that
outdoor air samples are collected concurrent with indoor
samples for comparison purposes for measurement of
baseline ambient air conditions. Indoor contamination
can be indicated by indoor mold distributions (both spe-
cies and concentrations) that differ significantly from the
distributions in outdoor samples [14]. Captured mold
spores can be examined under a microscope to identify
the mold species/groups and determine concentrations or
they can be cultured on growth media and the resulting
colonies counted and identified. Both techniques require
considerable expertise.

Dust sampling involves the collection of settled dust sam-
ples (e.g., floor dust) using a vacuum method in which
the dust is collected onto a porous filter medium or into
a container. The dust is then processed in the laboratory
and the mold identified by culturing viable spores.

Mold Standards. No standard numeric guidelines exist
for assessing whether mold contamination exists in an
area. In the United States, no EPA regulations or stan-
dards exist for airborne mold contaminants [26]. Various
governmental and private organizations have, however,
proposed guidance on the interpretation of fungal mea-
sures of environmental media in indoor environments
(quantitative limits for fungal concentrations).

Given evidence that young children may be especially
vulnerable to certain mycotoxins [18] and in view of the
potential severity or diseases associated with mycotoxin
exposure, some organizations support a precautionary
approach to limiting mold exposure [19]. For example,
the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that
infants under 1 year of age are not exposed at all to
chronically moldy, water-damaged environments [18].

Mold Mitigation. Common intervention methods for
addressing mold problems include the following:

* maintaining heating, ventilating, and air conditioning

(HVAC) systems;

° changing HVAC filters frequently, as recommended by
manufacturer;

° keeping gutters and downspouts in working order and
ensuring that they drain water away from the
foundation;

* routinely checking, cleaning, and drying drip pans in
air conditioners, refrigerators, and dehumidifiers;

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

* increasing ventilation (e.g., using exhaust fans or open
windows to remove humidity when cooking,
showering, or using the dishwasher);

* venting clothes dryers to the outside; and

* maintaining an ideal relative humidity level in the

home of 40% to 60%.

* locating and removing sources of moisture (controlling
dampness and humidity and repairing water leakage
problems);

° cleaning or removing mold-contaminated materials;
* removing materials with severe mold growth; and
° using high-efficiency air filters.

Moisture Control. Because one of the most important
factors affecting mold growth in homes is moisture level,
controlling this factor is crucial in mold abatement
strategies. Many simple measures can significantly control
moisture, for example maintaining indoor relative
humidity at no greater than 40%-60% through the use of
dehumidifiers, fixing water leakage problems, increasing
ventilation in kitchens and bathrooms by using exhaust
fans, venting clothes dryers to the outside, reducing the
number of indoor plants, using air conditioning at times
of high outdoor humidity, heating all rooms in the winter
and adding heating to outside wall closets, sloping
surrounding soil away from building foundations, fixing
gutters and downspouts, and using a sump pump in
basements prone to flooding [27]. Vapor barriers, sump
pumps, and aboveground vents can also be installed in
crawlspaces to prevent moisture problems [28].

Removal and Cleaning of Mold-contaminated
Materials. Nonporous (e.g., metals, glass, and hard plas-
tics) and semiporous (e.g., wood and concrete) materials
contaminated with mold and that are still structurally
sound can often be cleaned with bleach-and-water solu-
tions. However, in some cases, the material may not be eas-
ily cleaned or may be so severely contaminated that it may
have to be removed. It is recommended that porous mate-
rials (e.g., ceiling tiles, wallboards, and fabrics) that cannot
be cleaned be removed and discarded [29]. In severe cases,
clean-up and repair of mold-contaminated buildings may
be conducted using methods similar to those used for
abatement of other hazardous substances such as asbestos
[30]. For example, in situations of extensive colonization
(large surface areas greater than 100 square feet or where
the material is severely degraded), extreme precautions may
be required, including full containment (complete isolation
of work area) with critical barriers (airlock and decontami-

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials 5-5



Page 460: nation room) and negative pressurization, personnel
trained to handle hazardous wastes, and the use of full-face
respirators with HEPA filters, eye protection, and dispos-
able full-body covering [26].

Worker Protection When Conducting Mold
Assessment and Mitigation Projects. Activities such as
cleaning or removal of mold-contaminated materials in
homes, as well as investigations of mold contamination
extent, have the potential to disturb areas of mold growth
and release fungal spores and fragments into the air.
Recommended measures to protect workers during mold
remediation efforts depend on the severity and nature of
the mold contamination being addressed, but include the
use of well fitted particulate masks or respirators that
retain particles as small as 1 micrometer or less, disposable
gloves and coveralls, and protective eyewear [31].

Following are examples of guidance documents for
remediation of mold contamination:

New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene. Guidelines on Assessment and Remediation
of Fungi in Indoor Environments (available from

URL: http://www.nyc.gow/html/doh/html/epi/
moldrptl.shtml).

American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists (ACGIH) 1999 document, Biosaerosols:
Assessment and Control (can be ordered at URL
hetp://www.acgih.org/home.htm).

American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA) 2004
document, Assessment, Remediation, and Post-
Remediation Verification of Mold in Buildings (can be

ordered at URL http://www.aiha.org)

Environmental Protection Agency guidance, Mold
Remediation in Schools and Commercial Buildings
(includes many general principles also applicable to
residential mold mitigation efforts; available at URL:
http://www.epa.gov/iaq/molds/mold_remediation.
html)

Environmental Protection Agency guidance, A Brief
Guide to Mold, Moisture, and Your Home (for
homeowners and renters on how to clean up residential
mold problems and how to prevent mold growth;
available at URL: http://www.epa.gov/iaq/molds/
images/moldguide.pdi

Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation, Clean-up
Procedures for Mold in Houses, (provides qualitative
guidance for mold mitigation; can be ordered at URL:
hetps://www.cmhc-schl.ge.ca:50104/b2c/b2c/init.

do?language=en).

5-6 Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials

Figure 5.1 shows mold growth in the home.

Figure 5.1. Mold Growth in the Home

Chemical Pollutants

Carbon Monoxide

Carbon monoxide (CO) is a significant combustion pol-
lutant in the United States. CO is a leading cause of poi-
soning deaths [32]. According to the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA), CO-related nonfire
deaths are often attributed to heating and cooking equip-
ment. The leading specific types of equipment blamed for
CO-related deaths include gas-fueled space heaters, gas-
fueled furnaces, charcoal grills, gas-fueled ranges, portable
kerosene heaters, and wood stoves.

As with fire deaths, the risk for unintentional CO death is
highest for the very young (ages 4 years and younger) and
the very old (ages 75 years and older). CO is an odorless,
colorless gas that can cause sudden illness and death. It is a
result of the incomplete combustion of carbon. Headache,
dizziness, weakness, nausea, vomiting, chest pain, and con-
fusion are the most frequent symptoms of CO poisoning.
According to the American Lung Association (ALA) [33],
breathing low levels of CO can cause fatigue and increase
chest pain in people with chronic heart disease. Higher
levels of CO can cause flulike symptoms in healthy people.
In addition, extremely high levels of CO cause loss of con-
sciousness and death. In the home, any fuel-burning appli-
ance that is not adequately vented and maintained can be
a potential source of CO. The following steps should be
followed to reduce CO (as well as sulfur dioxide and
oxides of nitrogen) levels:

¢ Never use gas-powered equipment, charcoal grills,
hibachis, lanterns, or portable camping stoves in
enclosed areas or indoors.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 461: ¢ Install a CO monitor (Figure 5.2) in appropriate areas
of the home. These monitors are designed to provide a
warning before potentially life-threatening levels of
CO are reached.

* Choose vented appliances when possible and keep gas
appliances properly adjusted to decrease the
combustion to CO. (Note: Vented appliances are
always preferable for several reasons: oxygen levels,
carbon dioxide buildup, and humidity management).

¢ Only buy certified and tested combustion appliances
that meet current safety standards, as certified by
Underwriter’s Laboratories (UL), American Gas
Association (AGA) Laboratories, or equivalent.

¢ Assure that all gas heaters possess safety devices that
shut off an improperly vented gas heater. Heaters
made after 1982 use a pilot light safety system known
as an oxygen depletion sensor. When inadequate fresh
air exists, this system shuts off the heater before large
amounts of CO can be produced.

¢ Use appliances that have electronic ignitions instead of
pilot lights. These appliances are typically more energy
efficient and eliminate the continuous low-level
pollutants from pilot lights.

¢ Use the proper fuel in kerosene appliances.

° Install and use an exhaust fan vented to the outdoors
over gas stoves.

¢ Have a trained professional annually inspect, clean,
and tune up central heating systems (furnaces, flues,
and chimneys) and repair them as needed.

¢ Do not idle a car inside a garage.

The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC)
recommends installing at least one CO alarm per house-
hold near the sleeping area. For an extra measure of
safety, another alarm should be placed near the home’s
heating source. ALA recommends weighing the benefits
of using models powered by electrical outlets versus mod-
els powered by batteries that run out of power and need
replacing. Battery-powered CO detectors provide contin-
uous protection and do not require recalibration in the
event of a power outage. Electric-powered systems do not
provide protection during a loss of power and can take
up to 2 days to recalibrate. A device that can be easily
self-tested and reset to ensure proper functioning should
be chosen. The product should meet Underwriters
Laboratories Standard UL 2034.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Ozone

Inhaling ozone can damage the
lungs. Inhaling small amounts of
ozone can result in chest pain,
coughing, shortness of breath, and
throat irritation. Ozone can also
exacerbate chronic respiratory dis-
eases such as asthma. Susceptibility
to the effects of ozone varies from
person to person, but even healthy
people can experience respiratory
difficulties from exposure.

According to the North Carolina
Department of Health and
Human Services [34], the major
source of indoor ozone is outdoor
ozone. Indoor levels can vary from
10% of the outdoor air to levels as high as 80% of the
outdoor air. The Food and Drug Administration has set a
limit of 0.05 ppm of ozone in indoor air. In recent years,
there have been numerous advertisements for ion genera-
tors that destroy harmful indoor air pollutants. These
devices create ozone or elemental oxygen that reacts with
pollutants. EPA has reviewed the evidence on ozone gen-
erators and states: “available scientific evidence shows that
at concentrations that do not exceed public health stan-
dards, ozone has little potential to remove indoor air con-
taminants,” and “there is evidence to show that at
concentrations that do not exceed public health stan-
dards, ozone is not effective at removing many odor caus-

ing chemicals” [35].

Figure 5.2. Home Carbon
Monoxide Monitor

Source: U.S. Navy

Ozone is also created by the exposure of polluted air to
sunlight or ultraviolet light emitters. This ozone produced
outside of the home can infiltrate the house and react
with indoor surfaces, creating additional pollutants.

Environmental Tobacco Smoke or Secondhand Smoke

Like CO, environmental tobacco smoke (ETS; also
known as secondhand smoke), is a product of combus-
tion. The National Cancer Institute (NCI) [36], states
that ETS is the combination of two forms of smoke from
burning tobacco products:

* Sidestream smoke, or smoke that is emitted between
the puffs of a burning cigarette, pipe, or cigar; and

¢ Mainstream smoke, or the smoke that is exhaled by
the smoker.

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials 5-7



Page 462: The physiologic effects of ETS are numerous. ETS can
trigger asthma; irritate the eyes, nose, and throat; and
cause ear infections in children, respiratory illnesses, and
lung cancer. ETS is believed to cause asthma by irritating
chronically inflamed bronchial passages. According to the
EPA [37], ETS is a Group A carcinogen; thus, it is a
known cause of cancer in humans. Laboratory analysis
has revealed that ETS contains in excess of 4,000 sub-
stances, more than 60 of which cause cancer in humans
or animals. The EPA also estimates that approximately
3,000 lung cancer deaths occur each year in nonsmokers
due to ETS. Additionally, passive smoking can lead to
coughing, excess phlegm, and chest discomfort. NCI also
notes that spontaneous abortion (miscarriage), cervical
cancer, sudden infant death syndrome, low birth weight,
nasal sinus cancer, decreased lung function, exacerbation
of cystic fibrosis, and negative cognitive and behavioral
effects in children have been linked to ETS [36].

The EPA [37] states that, because of their relative body
size and respiratory rates, children are affected by ETS
more than adults are. It is estimated that an additional
7,500 to 15,000 hospitalizations resulting from increased
respiratory infections occur in children younger than 18
months of age due to ETS exposure. Figure 5.3 shows the
ETS exposure levels in homes with children under age 7
years. The following actions are recommended in the
home to protect children from ETS:

° if individuals insist on smoking, increase ventilation in
the smoking area by opening windows or using
exhaust fans; and

* refrain from smoking in the presence of children and
do not allow babysitters or others who work in the
home to smoke in the home or near children.

Volatile Organic Compounds

In the modern home, many organic chemicals are used as
ingredients in household products. Organic chemicals
that vaporize and become gases at normal room
temperature are collectively known as VOCs.

Examples of common items that can release VOCs
include paints, varnishes, and wax, as well as in many
cleaning, disinfecting, cosmetic, degreasing, and hobby
products. Levels of approximately a dozen common
VOCs can be two to five times higher inside the home, as
opposed to outside, whether in highly industrialized areas
or rural areas. VOCs that frequently pollute indoor air
include toluene, styrene, xylenes, and trichloroethylene.
Some of these chemicals may be emitted from aerosol
products, dry-cleaned clothing, paints, varnishes, glues,

5-8 Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials

art supplies, cleaners, spot removers, floor waxes, polishes,
and air fresheners. The health effects of these chemicals
are varied. Trichlorethylene has been linked to childhood
leukemia. Exposure to toluene can put pregnant women
at risk for having babies with neurologic problems,
retarded growth, and developmental problems. Xylenes
have been linked to birth defects. Styrene is a suspected
endocrine disruptor, a chemical that can block or mimic
hormones in humans or animals. EPA data reveal that
methylene chloride, a common component of some paint
strippers, adhesive removers, and specialized aerosol spray
paints, causes cancer in animals [38]. Methylene chloride
is also converted to CO in the body and can cause symp-
toms associated with CO exposure. Benzene, a known
human carcinogen, is contained in tobacco smoke, stored
fuels, and paint supplies. Perchloroethylene, a product
uncommonly found in homes, but common to dry clean-
ers, can be a pollution source by off-gassing from newly
cleaned clothing. Environmental Media Services [39] also
notes that xylene, ketones, and aldehydes are used in
aerosol products and air fresheners.

To lower levels of VOCs in the home, follow these steps:
* use all household products according to directions;
* provide good ventilation when using these products;

* properly dispose of partially full containers of old or
unneeded chemicals;

° purchase limited quantities of products; and

* minimize exposure to emissions from products
containing methylene chloride, benzene, and
perchlorethylene.

A prominent VOC found in household products and
construction products is formaldehyde. According to
CPSC [40], these products include the glue or adhesive
used in pressed wood products; preservatives in paints,
coating, and cosmetics; coatings used for permanent-press
quality in fabrics and draperies; and the finish on paper
products and certain insulation materials. Formaldehyde

Measure E4. Percentage of Homes With Children
Under 7 Where Someone Smokes Regularly

35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%

5%

0%

Figure 5.3. Environmental Tobacco Smoke and Children’s Exposure [37]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 463: is contained in urea-formaldehyde (UF) foam insulation
installed in the wall cavities of homes as an energy con-
servation measure. Levels of formaldehyde increase soon
after installation of this product, but these levels decline
with time. In 1982, CPSC voted to ban UF foam insula-
tion. The courts overturned the ban; however, the public-
ity has decreased the use of this product.

More recently, the most significant source of formalde-
hyde in homes has been pressed wood products made
using adhesives that contain UF resins [41]. The most
significant of these is medium-density fiberboard, which
contains a higher resin-to-wood ratio than any other UF
pressed wood product. This product is generally recog-
nized as being the highest formaldehyde-emitting pressed
wood product. Additional pressed wood products are pro-
duced using phenol-formaldehyde resin. The latter type
of resin generally emits formaldehyde at a considerably
slower rate than those containing UF resin. The emission
rate for both resins will change over time and will be
influenced by high indoor temperatures and humidity.
Since 1985, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) regulations (24 CFR 3280.308,
3280.309, and 3280.406) have permitted only the use of
plywood and particleboard that conform to specified
formaldehyde emission limits in the construction of pre-
fabricated and manufactured homes [42]. This limit was
to ensure that indoor formaldehyde levels are below 0.4

CPSC [40] notes that formaldehyde is a colorless, strong-
smelling gas. At an air level above 0.1 ppm, it can cause
watery eyes; burning sensations in the eyes, nose, and
throat; nausea; coughing; chest tightness; wheezing; skin
rashes; and allergic reactions. Laboratory animal studies
have revealed that formaldehyde can cause cancer in ani-
mals and may cause cancer in humans. Formaldehyde is
usually present at levels less than 0.03 ppm indoors and
outdoors, with rural areas generally experiencing lower
concentrations than urban areas. Indoor areas that con-
tain products that release formaldehyde can have levels
greater than 0.03 ppm. CPSC also recommends the fol-
lowing actions to avoid high levels of exposure to
formaldehyde:

* Purchase pressed wood products that are labeled or
stamped to be in conformance with American
National Standards Institute criteria ANSI A208. 1-
1993. Use particleboard flooring marked with ANSI
grades PBU, D2, or D3. Medium-density fiberboard
should be in conformance with ANSI A208.2-1994
and hardwood plywood with ANSI/HPVA HP-1-
1994 (Figure 5.4).

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

[— WAROWOOO PLYWOOD MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION ORMS TO HUD

FORMALDEHYDE |  simuLaTEO | FLAME SPREAD FORMALDEHYDE
| EMISSION 0.2 PPM| DECORATIVE | 200 OR LESS 24 CFR PART 3280
| CONFORMS TO | FINISH ON TMA Et FOR PART
| pos wooo :
| REQUIREMENTS ry. >
ooh Loupe Mit 00

amma THICK . GLUE BOND Nantes
"
HP-86-84 | go MilL | ANSiMPMAHP | SOLO WOODS, INC
| “Grace | 1983 TIMBERLAKE, MD

Figure 5.4. Wood Products Label [42]

¢ Purchase furniture or cabinets that contain a high
percentage of panel surface and edges that are
laminated or coated. Unlaminated or uncoated (raw)
panels of pressed wood panel products will generally
emit more formaldehyde than those that are laminated
or coated.

* Use alternative products, such as wood panel products
not made with UF glues, lumber, or metal.

¢ Avoid the use of foamed-in-place insulation containing
formaldehyde, especially UF foam insulation.

* Wash durable-press fabrics before use.

CPSC also recommends the following actions to reduce
existing levels of indoor formaldehyde:

* Ventilate the home well by opening doors and
windows and installing an exhaust fan(s).

° Seal the surfaces of formaldehyde-containing products
that are not laminated or coated with paint, varnish,
or a layer of vinyl or polyurethane-like materials.

¢ Remove products that release formaldehyde in the
indoor air from the home.

Radon

According to the EPA [43], radon is a colorless, odorless
gas that occurs naturally in soil and rock and is a decay
product of uranium. The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)
[44] notes that the typical uranium content of rock and
the surrounding soil is between 1 and 3 ppm. Higher lev-
els of uranium are often contained in rock such as light-
colored volcanic rock, granite, dark shale, and
sedimentary rock containing phosphate. Uranium levels
as high as 100 ppm may be present in various areas of the
United States because of these rocks. The main source of
high-level radon pollution in buildings is surrounding
uranium-containing soil. Thus, the greater the level of
uranium nearby, the greater the chances are that buildings
in the area will have high levels of indoor radon. Figure
5.5 demonstrates the geographic variation in radon levels
in the United States. Maps of the individual states and
areas that have proven high for radon are available at

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials 5-9



Page 464: ”
SH Zone Designation

Figure 5.5. EPA Map of Radon Zones [43]

Zone 1: predicted average indoor radon screening level greater than
4 pCi/L [picocuries per liter]

Zone 2: predicted average indoor radon screening level between 2
and 4 pCi/L

Zone 3: predicted average indoor radon screening level less than 2
pCi/L

Important: Consult the EPA Map of Radon Zones document [EPA-
402-R-93-071] before using this map. This document contains infor-
mation on radon potential variations within counties.

EPA also recommends that this map be supplemented with any avail-
able local data to further understand and predict the radon potential
of a specific area.

http://www.epa.gov/iaq/radon/ zonemap.html. A free
video is available from the U.S. EPA: call 1-800-438-
4318 and ask for EPA 402-V-02-003 (TRT 13.10).

Radon, according to the California Geological Survey
[45], is one of the intermediate radioactive elements
formed during the radioactive decay of uranium-238,
uranium-235, or thorium-232. Radon-222 is the radon
isotope of most concern to public health because of its
longer half-life (3.8 days). The mobility of radon gas is

much greater than are uranium and radium, which are

solids at room temperature. Thus, radon can leave rocks

and soil, move through fractures and pore spaces, and
ultimately enter a building to collect in high concentra-
tions. When in water, radon moves less than 1 inch

before it decays, compared to 6 feet or more in dry rocks

or soil. USGS [44] notes that radon near the surface of
soil typically escapes into the atmosphere. However,
where a house is present, soil air often flows toward the
house foundation because of

° differences in air pressure between the soil and the
house, with soil pressure often being higher;

* presence of openings in the house's foundation; and
* increases in permeability around the basement

(if present).

5-10 Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials

Houses are often constructed with loose fill under a base-
ment slab and between the walls and exterior ground.
This fill is more permeable than the original ground.
Houses typically draw less than 1% of their indoor air
from the soil. However, houses with low indoor air pres-
sures, poorly sealed foundations, and several entry points
for soil air may draw up to 20% of their indoor air from
the soil.

USGS [44] states that radon may also enter the home
through the water systems. Surface water sources typically
contain little radon because it escapes into the air. In
larger cities, radon is released to the air by municipal pro-
cessing systems that aerate the water. However, in areas
where groundwater is the main water supply for commu-
nities, small public systems and private wells are typically
closed systems that do not allow radon to escape. Radon
then enters the indoor air from showers, clothes washing,
dishwashing, and other uses of water. Figure 5.6 shows
typical entry points of radon.

Health risks of radon stem from its breakdown into
“radon daughters,” which emit high-energy alpha parti-
cles. These progeny enter the lungs, attach themselves,
and may eventually lead to lung cancer. This exposure to
radon is believed to contribute to between 15,000 and
21,000 excess lung cancer deaths in the United States
each year. The EPA has identified levels greater than 4
picocuries per liter as levels at which remedial action
should be taken. Approximately 1 in 15 homes nation-
wide have radon above this level, according to the U.S.
Surgeon General’s recent advisory [46]. Smokers are at
significantly higher risk for radon-related lung cancer.

Loose-fitting
pipe

Floor
drain
Sump

Figure 5.6. Radon Entry [30]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 465: Radon in the home can be measured either by the occu-
pant or by a professional. Because radon has no odor or
color, special devices are used to measure its presence.
Radon levels vary from day to day and season to season.
Short-term tests (2 to 90 days) are best if quick results are
needed, but long-term tests (more than 3 months) yield
better information on average year-round exposure.
Measurement devices are routinely placed in the lowest
occupied level of the home. The devices either measure

the radon gas directly or the daughter products. The sim-
plest devices are passive, require no electricity, and include
a charcoal canister, charcoal liquid scintillation device,
alpha tract detector, and electret ion detectors [47].

All of these devices, with the exception of the ion detec-
tor, can be purchased in hardware stores or by mail. The
ion detector generally is only available through laborato-
ries. These devices are inexpensive, primarily used for
short-term testing, and require little to no training. Active
devices, however, need electrical power and include con-
tinuous monitoring devices. They are customarily more
expensive and require professionally trained testers for
their operation. Figure 5.7 shows examples of the charcoal
tester (a; left) and the alpha tract detector (b; right).

After testing and evaluation by a professional, it may be
necessary to lower the radon levels in the structure. The
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
[48] states that in most cases, a system with pipes and a
fan is used to reduce radon. This system, known as a sub-
slab depressurization system, requires no major changes to
the home. The cost typically ranges from $500 to $2,500
and averages approximately $1,000, varying with geo-
graphic region. The typical mitigation system usually has
only one pipe penetrating through the basement floor; the
pipe also may be installed outside the house. The
Connecticut Department of Public Health [49] notes that
it is more cost effective to include radon-resistant tech-
niques while constructing a building than to install a

Figure 5.7. Home Radon Detectors [31]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Junction Bo:
{to power fan and warning
device if needed)
Vent Pipe Running
Between Subslab

Gravel and Roof

Sealing and
Caulking

Polyethylene
Soil-Gas Retarder
Between Slab and
Gravel

Figure 5.8. Radon-resistant Construction [50]

reduction system in an existing home. Inclusion of
radon-resistant techniques in initial construction costs
approximately $350 to $500 [50]. Figure 5.8 shows
examples of radon-resistant construction techniques.

A passive radon-resistant system has five major parts:
1. A layer of gas-permeable material under the foundation.
2. The foundation (usually 4 inches of gravel).

3. Plastic sheeting over the foundation, with all openings in
the concrete foundation floor sealed and caulked.

4. A gas-tight, 3- or 4-inch vent pipe running from under
the foundation through the house to the roof.

5. A roughed-in electrical junction box for the future
installation of a fan, if needed.

These features create a physical barrier to radon entry.
The vent pipe redirects the flow of air under the founda-
tion, preventing radon from seeping into the house.

Pesticides

Much pesticide use could be reduced if integrated pest
management (IPM) practices were used in the home.
IPM is a coordinated approach to managing roaches,
rodents, mosquitoes, and other pests that integrates
inspection, monitoring, treatment, and evaluation, with
special emphasis on the decreased use of toxic agents.
However, all pest management options, including natural,
biologic, cultural, and chemical methods, should be con-
sidered. Those that have the least impact on health and
the environment should be selected. Most household

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials 5-11



Page 466: pests can be controlled by eliminating the habitat for the
pest both inside and outside, building or screening them
out, eliminating food and harborage areas, and safely
using appropriate pesticides if necessary.

EPA [51] states that 75% of U.S. households used at
least one pesticide indoors during the past year and that
80% of most people’s exposure to pesticides occurs
indoors. Measurable levels of up to a dozen pesticides
have been found in the air inside homes. Pesticides used
in and around the home include products to control
insects (insecticides), termites (termiticides), rodents
(rodenticides), fungi (fungicides), and microbes (disinfec-
tants). These products are found in sprays, sticks, pow-
ders, crystals, balls, and foggers.

Delaplane [52] notes that the ancient Romans killed
insect pests by burning sulfur and controlled weeds with
salt. In the 1600s, ants were controlled with mixtures of
honey and arsenic. U.S. farmers in the late 19th century
used copper actoarsenite (Paris green), calcium arsenate,
nicotine sulfate, and sulfur to control insect pests in field
crops. By World War II and afterward, numerous pesti-
cides had been introduced, including DDT, BHC,
aldrin, dieldrin, endrin, and 2,4-D. A significant factor
with regard to these pesticides used in and around the
home is their impact on children. According to a 2003
EPA survey, 47% of all households with children under
the age of 5 years had at least one pesticide stored in an
unlocked cabinet less than 4 feet off the ground. This is
within easy reach of children. Similarly, 74% of house-
holds without children under the age of 5 also stored
pesticides in an unlocked cabinet less than 4 feet off the
ground. This issue is significant because 13% of all pesti-
cide poisoning incidents occur in homes other than the
child’s home. The EPA [53] notes a report by the
American Association of Poison Control Centers indicat-
ing that approximately 79,000 children were involved in
common household pesticide poisonings or exposures.

The health effects of pesticides vary with the product.
However, local effects from most of the products will be
on eyes, noses, and throats; more severe consequences,
such as on the central nervous system and kidneys and
on cancer risks, are possible. The active and inert ingredi-
ents of pesticides can be organic compounds, which can
contribute to the level of organic compounds in indoor
air. More significantly, products containing cyclodiene
pesticides have been commonly associated with misappli-
cation. Individuals inadvertently exposed during this mis-
application had numerous symptoms, including
headaches, dizziness, muscle twitching, weakness, tin-

5-12 Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials

gling sensations, and nausea. In addition, there is con-
cern that these pesticides may cause long-term damage to
the liver and the central nervous system, as well as an
increased cancer risk. Cyclodiene pesticides were devel-
oped for use as insecticides in the 1940s and 1950s. The
four main cyclodiene pesticides—aldrin, dieldrin, chlor-
dane, and heptachlor—were used to guard soil and seed
against insect infestation and to control insect pests in
crops. Outside of agriculture they were used for ant con-
trol; farm, industrial, and domestic control of fleas, flies,
lice, and mites; locust control; termite control in build-
ings, fences, and power poles; and pest control in home
gardens. No other commercial use is permitted for cyclo-
diene or related products. The only exception is the use
of heptachlor by utility companies to control fire ants in
underground cable boxes.

An EPA survey [53] revealed that bathrooms and kitch-
ens are areas in the home most likely to have improperly
stored pesticides. In the United States, EPA regulates pes-
ticides under the pesticide law known as the Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act. Since 1981,
this law has required most residential-use pesticides to
bear a signal word such as “danger” or “warning” and to
be contained in child-resistant packaging. This type of
packaging is designed to prevent or delay access by most
children under the age of 5 years. EPA offers the follow-
ing recommendations for preventing accidental
poisoning:

* store pesticides away from the reach of children in a
locked cabinet, garden shed, or similar location;

* read the product label and follow all directions exactly,
especially precautions and restrictions;

¢ remove children, pets, and toys from areas before
applying pesticides;

¢ if interrupted while applying a pesticide, properly
close the package and assure that the container is not
within reach of children;

¢ do not transfer pesticides to other containers that
children may associate with food or drink;

* do not place rodent or insect baits where small
children have access to them;

* use child-resistant packaging properly by closing the
container tightly after use;

* assure that other caregivers for children are aware of
the potential hazards of pesticides;

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 467: * teach children that pesticides are poisons and should
not be handled; and

° keep the local Poison Control Center telephone
number available.

Toxic Materials

Asbestos

Asbestos, from the Greek word meaning “inextinguish-
able,” refers to a group of six naturally occurring mineral
fibers. Asbestos is a mineral fiber of which there are sev-
eral types: amosite, crocidiolite, tremolite, actinolite,
anthrophyllite, and chrysotile. Chrysotile asbestos, also
known as white asbestos, is the predominant commercial
form of asbestos. Asbestos is strong, flexible, resistant to
heat and chemical corrosion, and insulates well. These
features led to the use of asbestos in up to 3,000 con-
sumer products before government agencies began to
phase it out in the 1970s because of its health hazards.
Asbestos has been used in insulation, roofing, siding,
vinyl floor tiles, fireproofing materials, texturized paint
and soundproofing materials, heating appliances (such as
clothes dryers and ovens), fireproof gloves, and ironing
boards. Asbestos continues to be used in some products,
such as brake pads. Other mineral products, such as talc
and vermiculite, can be contaminated with asbestos.

The health effects of asbestos exposure are numerous and
varied. Industrial studies of workers exposed to asbestos
in factories and shipyards have revealed three primary
health risk concerns from breathing high levels of asbestos
fibers: lung cancer, mesothelioma (a cancer of the lining
of the chest and the abdominal cavity), and asbestosis (a
condition in which the lungs become scarred with fibrous
tissue).

The risk for all of these conditions is amplified as the
number of fibers inhaled increases. Smoking also
enhances the risk for lung cancer from inhaling asbestos
fibers by acting synergistically. The incubation period
(from time of exposure to appearance of symptoms) of
these diseases is usually about 20 to 30 years. Individuals
who develop asbestosis have typically been exposed to
high levels of asbestos for a long time. Exposure levels to
asbestos are measured in fibers per cubic centimeter of
air. Most individuals are exposed to small amounts of
asbestos in daily living activities; however, a preponder-
ance of them do not develop health problems. According
to the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
(ATSDR), if an individual is exposed, several factors
determine whether the individual will be harmed [54].
These factors include the dose (how much), the duration

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

(how long), and the fiber type (mineral form and distribu-
tion). ATSDR also states that children may be more
adversely affected than adults [54]. Children breathe dif-
ferently and have different lung structures than adults;
however, it has not been determined whether these differ-
ences cause a greater amount of asbestos fibers to stay in
the lungs of a child than in the lungs of an adult. In addi-
tion, children drink more fluids per kilogram of body
weight than do adults and they can be exposed through
asbestos-contaminated drinking water. Eating asbestos-
contaminated soil and dust is another source of exposure
for children. Certain children intentionally eat soil and
children’s hand-to-mouth activities mean that all young
children eat more soil than do adults. Family members
also have been exposed to asbestos that was carried home
on the clothing of other family members who worked in
asbestos mines or mills. Breathing asbestos fibers may
result in difficulty in breathing. Diseases usually appear
many years after the first exposure to asbestos and are
therefore not likely to be seen in children. But people who
have been exposed to asbestos at a young age may be
more likely to contract diseases than those who are first
exposed later in life. In the small number of studies that
have specifically looked at asbestos exposure in children,
there is no indication that younger people might develop
asbestos-related diseases more quickly than older people.
Developing fetuses and infants are not likely to be
exposed to asbestos through the placenta or breast milk of
the mother. Results of animal studies do not indicate that
exposure to asbestos is likely to result in birth defects.

A joint document issued by CPSC, EPA, and ALA, notes
that most products in today’s homes do not contain asbes-
tos. However, asbestos can still be found in products and
areas of the home. These products contain asbestos that
could be inhaled and are required to be labeled as such.
Until the 1970s, many types of building products and
insulation materials used in homes routinely contained
asbestos. A potential asbestos problem both inside and
outside the home is that of vermiculite. According to the
USGS [55], vermiculite is a claylike material that expands
when heated to form wormlike particles. It is used in con-
crete aggregate, fertilizer carriers, insulation, potting soil,
and soil conditioners. This product ceased being mined in
1992, but old stocks may still be available. Common
products that contained asbestos in the past and condi-
tions that may release fibers include the following:

* Steam pipes, boilers, and furnace ducts insulated with
an asbestos blanket or asbestos paper tape. These
materials may release asbestos fibers if damaged,
repaired, or removed improperly.

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials 5-13



Page 468: * Resilient floor tiles (vinyl asbestos, asphalt, and
rubber), the backing on vinyl sheet flooring, and
adhesives used for installing floor tile. Sanding tiles can
release fibers, as may scraping or sanding the backing
of sheet flooring during removal.

* Cement sheet, millboard, and paper used as insulation
around furnaces and wood-burning stoves. Repairing
or removing appliances may release asbestos fibers, as
may cutting, tearing, sanding, drilling, or sawing
insulation.

* Door gaskets in furnaces, wood stoves, and coal stoves.
Worn seals can release asbestos fibers during use.

* Soundproofing or decorative material sprayed on walls
and ceilings. Loose, crumbly, or water-damaged
material may release fibers, as will sanding, drilling, or
scraping the material.

¢ Patching and joint compounds for walls, ceilings, and
textured paints. Sanding, scraping, or drilling these
surfaces may release asbestos.

¢ Asbestos cement roofing, shingles, and siding. These
products are not likely to release asbestos fibers unless
sawed, drilled, or cut.

° Artificial ashes and embers sold for use in gas-fired
fireplaces in addition to other older household
products such as fireproof gloves, stove-top pads,
ironing board covers, and certain hair dryers.

¢ Automobile brake pads and linings, clutch facings, and
gaskets.

Homeowners who believe material in their home may be
asbestos should not disturb the material. Generally, mate-
rial in good condition will not release asbestos fibers, and
there is little danger unless the fibers are released and
inhaled into the lungs. However, if disturbed, asbestos
material may release asbestos fibers, which can be inhaled
into the lungs. The fibers can remain in the lungs for a
long time, increasing the risk for disease. Suspected asbes-
tos-containing material should be checked regularly for
damage from abrasions, tears, or water. If possible, access
to the area should be limited. Asbestos-containing products
such as asbestos gloves, stove-top pads, and ironing board
covers should be discarded if damaged or worn. Permission
and proper disposal methods should be obtainable from
local health, environmental, or other appropriate officials.
If asbestos material is more than slightly damaged, or if
planned changes in the home might disturb it, repair or
removal by a professional is needed. Before remodeling,
determine whether asbestos materials are present.

5-14 Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials

Only a trained professional can confirm suspected asbes-

tos materials that are part of a home’s construction. This

individual will take samples for analysis and submit them
to an EPA-approved laboratory.

If the asbestos material is in good shape and will not be
disturbed, the best approach is to take no action and con-
tinue to monitor the material. If the material needs action
to address potential exposure problems, there are two
approaches to correcting the problem: repair and removal.

Repair involves sealing or covering the asbestos material.
Sealing or encapsulation involves treating the material
with a sealant that either binds the asbestos fibers
together or coats the material so fibers are not released.
This is an approach often used for pipe, furnace, and
boiler insulation; however, this work should be done only
by a professional who is trained to handle asbestos safely.
Covering (enclosing) involves placing something over or
around the material that contains asbestos to prevent
release of fibers. Exposed insulated piping may be covered
with a protective wrap or jacket. In the repair process, the
approach is for the material to remain in position undis-
turbed. Repair is a less expensive process than is removal.

With any type of repair, the asbestos remains in place.
Repair may make later removal of asbestos, if necessary,
more difficult and costly. Repairs can be major or minor.
Both major and minor repairs must be done only by a
professional trained in methods for safely handling
asbestos.

Removal is usually the most expensive and, unless
required by state or local regulations, should be the last
option considered in most situations. This is because
removal poses the greatest risk for fiber release. However,
removal may be required when remodeling or making
major changes to the home that will disturb asbestos
material. In addition, removal may be called for if asbes-
tos material is damaged extensively and cannot be other-
wise repaired. Removal is complex and must be done only
by a contractor with special training. Improper removal
of asbestos material may create more of a problem than
simply leaving it alone.

Lead

Many individuals recognize lead in the form often seen in
tire weights and fishing equipment, but few recognize its
various forms in and around the home. The Merriam-
Webster Dictionary [56] defines lead as “a heavy soft mal-
leable ductile plastic but inelastic bluish white metallic
element found mostly in combination and used especially
in pipes, cable sheaths, batteries, solder, and shields

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 469: against radioactivity.” Lead is a metal with many uses. It
melts easily and quickly. It can be molded or shaped into
thin sheets and can be drawn out into wire or threads.
Lead also is very resistant to weather conditions. Lead
and lead compounds are toxic and can present a severe
hazard to those who are overexposed to them. Whether
ingested or inhaled, lead is readily absorbed and distrib-
uted throughout the body.

Until 1978, lead compounds were an important compo-
nent of many paints. Lead was added to paint to pro-
mote adhesion, corrosion control, drying, and covering.
White lead (lead carbonate), linseed oil, and inorganic
pigments were the basic components for paint in the
18th and 19th centuries, and continued until the middle
of the 20th century. Lead was banned by CPSC in 1978.
Lead-based paint was used extensively on exteriors and
interior trim-work, window sills, sashes, window frames,
baseboards, wainscoting, doors, frames, and high-gloss
wall surfaces, such as those found in kitchens and bath-
rooms. The only way to determine which building com-
ponents are coated with lead paint is through an
inspection for lead-based paint. Almost all painted met-
als were primed with red lead or painted with lead-based
paints. Even milk (casein) and water-based paints (dis-
temper and calcimines) could contain some lead, usually
in the form of hiding agents or pigments. Varnishes
sometimes contained lead. Lead compounds also were
used as driers in paint and window-glazing putty.

Lead is widespread in the environment. People absorb
lead from a variety of sources every day. Although lead
has been used in numerous consumer products, the most
important sources of lead exposure to children and oth-
ers today are the following:

contaminated house dust that has settled on
horizontal surfaces,

deteriorated lead-based paint,

contaminated bare soil,

food (which can be contaminated by lead in the air or
in food containers, particularly lead-soldered food
containers),

drinking water (from corrosion of plumbing systems),
and

occupational exposure or hobbies.

Federal controls on lead in gasoline, new paint, food
canning, and drinking water, as well as lead from indus-
trial air emissions, have significantly reduced total
human exposure to lead. The number of children with

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

blood lead levels above 10 micrograms per deciliter (ug/
dL), a level designated as showing no physiologic toxicity,
has declined from 1.7 million in the late 1980s to
310,000 in 1999-2002. This demonstrates that the con-
trols have been effective, but that many children are still
at risk. CDC data show that deteriorated lead-based paint
and the contaminated dust and soil it generates are the
most common sources of exposure to children today.
HUD data show that the number of houses with lead
paint declined from 64 million in 1990 to 38 million in
2000 [57].

Children are more vulnerable to lead poisoning than are
adults. Infants can be exposed to lead in the womb if
their mothers have lead in their bodies. Infants and chil-
dren can swallow and breathe lead in dirt, dust, or sand
through normal hand-to-mouth contact while they play
on the floor or ground. These activities make it easier for
children to be exposed to lead. Other sources of exposure
have included imported vinyl miniblinds, crayons, chil-
dren’s jewelry, and candy. In 2004, increases in lead in
water service pipes were observed in Washington, D.C.,
accompanied by increases in blood lead levels in children
under the age of 6 years who were served by the water
system [58].

In some cases, children swallow nonfood items such as
paint chips. These may contain very large amounts of
lead, particularly in and around older houses that were
painted with lead-based paint. Many studies have verified
the effect of lead exposure on IQ scores in the United
States. The effects of lead exposure have been reviewed by
the National Academy of Sciences [59].

Generally, the tests for blood lead levels are from drawn
blood, not from a finger-stick test, which can be unreli-
able if performed improperly. Units are measured in
micrograms per deciliter and reflect the 1991 guidance
from the Centers of Disease Control [60]:

° Children: 10 pg/dL (level of concern)—find source of
lead;

* Children: 15 g/dL and above—environmental
intervention, counseling, medical monitoring;

°¢ Children: 20 g/dL and above—medical treatment;

¢ Adults: 25 pg/dL (level of concern)—find source of
lead; and

¢ Adults: 50 pg/dL— Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) standard for medical removal
from the worksite.

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials 5-15



Page 470: Adults are usually exposed to lead from occupational
sources (e.g., battery construction, paint removal) or at
home (e.g., paint removal, home renovations).

In 1978, CPSC banned the use of lead-based paint in
residential housing. Because houses are periodically
repainted, the most recent layer of paint will most likely
not contain lead, but the older layers underneath proba-
bly will. Therefore, the only way to accurately determine
the amount of lead present in older paint is to have it
analyzed.

It is important that owners of homes built before 1978
be aware that layers of older paint can contain a great
deal of lead. Guidelines on identifying and controlling
lead-based paint hazards in housing have been published
by HUD [61].

Controlling Lead Hazards

The purpose of a home risk assessment is to determine,
through testing and evaluation, where hazards from lead
warrant remedial action. A certified inspector or risk
assessor can test paint, soil, or lead dust either on-site or
in a laboratory using methods such as x-ray fluorescence
(XRF) analyzers, chemicals, dust wipe tests, and atomic
absorption spectroscopy. Lists of service providers are
available by calling 1-800-424-LEAD. Do-it-yourself test
kits are commercially available; however, these kits do
not tell you how much lead is present, and their reliabil-
ity at detecting low levels of lead has not been deter-
mined. Professional testing for lead in paint is
recommended. The recommended sampling method for
dust is the surface wet wipe. Dust samples are collected
from different surfaces, such as bare floors, window sills,
and window wells. Each sample is collected from a mea-
sured surface area using a wet wipe, which is sent to a

laboratory for testing. Risk assessments can be fairly low-
cost investigations of the location, condition, and severity
of lead hazards found in house dust, soil, water, and dete-
riorating paint. Risk assessments also will address other
sources of lead from hobbies, crockery, water, and work
environments. These services are critical when owners are
seeking to implement measures to reduce suspected lead
hazards in housing and day-care centers or when exten-
sive rehabilitation is planned.

HUD has published detailed protocols for risk assess-
ments and inspections [61].

It is important from a health standpoint that future ten-
ants, painters, and construction workers know that lead-
based paint is present, even under treated surfaces, so
they can take precautions when working in areas that will
generate lead dust. Whenever mitigation work is com-
pleted, it is important to have a clearance test using the
dust wipe method to ensure that lead-laden dust gener-
ated during the work does not remain at levels above
those established by the EPA and HUD. Such testing is
required for owners of most housing that is receiving fed-
eral financial assistance, such as Section 8 rental housing.
A building or housing file should be maintained and
updated whenever any additional lead hazard control
work is completed. Owners are required by law to dis-
close information about lead-based paint or lead-based
paint hazards to buyers or tenants before completing a
sales or lease contract [62].

All hazards should be controlled as identified in a risk

assessment.

‘Whenever extensive amounts of lead must be removed

Action Levels for Lead

Lead in paint. Differing methods report results in differing
units. Lead is considered a potential hazard if above the fol-
lowing levels, but be ak
ly handled. Below are the current action levels identified by

HUD [62] and EPA (40 CFR Part 745

ard at lower levels if improper-

Lab analysis of samples:

5,000 milligram per kilogram (mg/kg) or 5,000 parts per

million (ppm) 0.5% lead by weight.

X-ray fluorescence:
1 milligram per square centimeter (mg/cm?)

5-16 Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials

Lead in dust:

Floors, 40 micrograms per square foot (ug/ft?)

Window
(clearance o:

50 pg/ft? Window troughs, 400 pg/ft

Lead in soil:
High-contact bare play

Other yard areas: 1,200 ppm

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 471: from a property, or when methods of removing toxic
substances will affect the environment, it is extremely
important that the owner be aware of the issues sur-
rounding worker safety, environmental controls, and
proper disposal. Appropriate architectural, engineering,
and environmental professionals should be consulted
when lead hazard projects are complex.

Following are brief explanations of the two approaches
for controlling lead hazard risks. These controls are rec-
ommended by HUD in HUD Guidelines for the
Evaluation and Control of Lead-Based Paint Hazards in
Housing [61], and are summarized here to focus on spe-
cial considerations for historic housing:

Interim Controls. Short-term solutions include thor-
ough dust removal and thorough washdown and
cleanup, paint film stabilization and repainting, covering
of lead-contaminated soil, and informing tenants about
lead hazards. Interim controls require ongoing mainte-
nance and evaluation.

Hazard Abatement. Long-term solutions are defined as
having an expected life of 20 years or more and involve
permanent removal of hazardous paint through chemi-
cals, heat guns, or controlled sanding or abrasive meth-
ods; permanent removal of deteriorated painted features
through replacement; removal or permanent covering of
contaminated soil; and the use of enclosures (such as
drywall) to isolate painted surfaces. The use of special-
ized encapsulant products can be considered as perma-
nent abatement of lead.

Reducing and controlling lead hazards can be successfully
accomplished without destroying the character-defining
features and finishes of historic buildings. Federal and
state laws generally support the reasonable control of
lead-based paint hazards through a variety of treatments,
ranging from modified maintenance to selective substrate
removal. The key to protecting children, workers, and the
environment is to be informed about the hazards of lead,
to control exposure to lead dust and lead in soil and lead
paint chips, and to follow existing regulations.

The following summarizes several important regulations
that affect lead-hazard reduction projects. Owners should
be aware that regulations change, and they have a respon-
sibility to check state and local ordinances as well. Care
must be taken to ensure that any procedures used to
release lead from the home protect both the residents and
workers from lead dust exposure.

Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of
1992, Title X [62]. Part of the Housing and Community
Development Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-550) [63]. It
established that HUD issue Guidelines for the Evaluation
and Control of Lead-Based Paint Hazards in Housing 61]
to outline risk assessments, interim controls, and abate-
ment of lead-based paint hazards in housing. Title X calls
for the reduction of lead in federally supported housing.
It outlines the federal responsibility toward its own resi-
dential units and the need for disclosure of lead in resi-
dences, even private residences, before a sale. Title X also
required HUD to establish regulations for federally
assisted housing (24 CFR Part 35) and EPA to establish

Definitions Related to Lead

Deteriorated lead-based paint: Paint known to contain lead above the regulated level that shows signs of peeling, chipping,

chalking, blistering, alligatoring, or otherwise separating from its substrate.

Dust removal: The process of removing dust to avoid creating a greater problem of spreading lead particles; usually through

wet or damp collection and use of HEPA vacuums.

Hazard abatement: Long-term measures to remove the hazards of lead-based paint through replacement of building com)

nents, enclosure, encapsulati » OF pa nt removal.

Interim control: Short-term methods to remove lead dust, stabilize deteriorating painted surfaces, treat friction and impact

surf. S that generate lead dust, and repaint surfaces. Maintenance can ensure that housing remains lead-safe.

Lead-based paint: Any ex
square centimeter (mg/cm?) or greater than 0.5% by weight (5,000 ppm, 5,000 micrograms per gram [pg/g], or 5,000 milli-

grams per kilogram [mg/kg]). For new paint, CPS
paint. Lead in paint can be measured by
proved laboratories.

has establi

ng paint, varnish, shellac, or other coating that is equal to or greater than 1.0 milligrams per

d as the maximum amount of lead allowed in new

x-ray fluorescence analyzers or laboratory analysis by certified personnel and ap-

Risk assessment: An on-site investigation to determine the presence and condition of lead-based paint, including limited test

samples and an evaluation of the age, condition, housekeeping practices, and uses of a residence.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials 5-17



Page 472: standards for lead in paint, dust, and soil, as well as stan-
dards for laboratory accreditation (40 CFR Part 745).
EPA’s residential lead hazard standards are available at
http://www.epa.gov/lead/leadhaz.htm.

Interim Final Rule on Lead in Construction (29 Code
of Federal Regulations [CFR] 1926.62) [64]. Issued by
OSHA, these regulations address worker safety, training,
and protective measures. The regulations are based in part
on personal-air sampling to determine the amount of lead
dust exposure to workers.

State Laws. States generally have the authority to regulate
the removal and transportation of lead-based paint and
the generated waste through the appropriate state envi-
ronmental and public health agencies. Most requirements
are for mitigation in the case of a lead-poisoned child, for
protection of children, or for oversight to ensure the safe
handling and disposal of lead waste. When undertaking a
lead-based paint reduction program, it is important to
determine which laws are in place that may affect the
project.

Local Ordinances. Check with local health departments,
poison control centers, and offices of housing and com-
munity development to determine whether any laws
require compliance by building owners. Determine
whether projects are considered abatements and will
require special contractors and permits.

Owner’s Responsibility. Owners are ultimately responsi-
ble for ensuring that hazardous waste is properly disposed
of when it is generated on their own sites. Owners should
check with their state government to determine whether
an abatement project requires a certified contractor.
Owners should establish that the contractor is responsible
for the safety of the crew, to ensure that all applicable
laws are followed, and that transporters and disposers of
hazardous waste have liability insurance as a protection
for the owner. The owner should notify the contractor
that lead-based paint may be present and that it is the
contractor's responsibility to follow appropriate work
practices to protect workers and to complete a thorough
cleanup to ensure that lead-laden dust is not present after
the work is completed. Renovation contractors are
required by EPA to distribute an informative educational
pamphlet (Protect Your Family from Lead in Your Home)
to occupants before starting work that could disturb lead-
based paint (http://www.epa.gov/lead/ leadinfo.

htm#remodeling).

5-18 Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials

Arsenic

Lead arsenate was used legally up to 1988 in most of the
orchards in the United States. Often 50 applications or
more of this pesticide were applied each year. This toxic
heavy metal compound has accumulated in the soil
around houses and under the numerous orchards in the
country, contaminating both wells and land. These
orchards are often turned into subdivisions as cities
expand and sprawl occurs. Residues from the pesticide
lead arsenate, once used heavily on apple, pear, and other
orchards, contaminate an estimated 70,000 to 120,000
acres in the state of Washington alone, some of it in areas
where agriculture has been replaced with housing, accord-
ing to state ecology department officials and others.

Lead arsenate, which was not banned for use on food
crops until 1988, nevertheless was mostly replaced by the
pesticide dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) and its
derivatives in the late 1940s. DDT was banned in the
United States in 1972, but is used elsewhere in the world.

For more than 20 years, the wood industry has infused
green wood with heavy doses of arsenic to kill bugs and
prevent rot. Numerous studies show that arsenic sticks to
children’s hands when they play on treated wood, and it
is absorbed through the skin and ingested when they put
their hands in their mouths. Although most uses of arse-
nic wood treatments were phased out by 2004, an esti-
mated 90% of existing outdoor structures are made of
arsenic-treated wood [65].

In a study conducted by the University of North Carolina
Environmental Quality Institute in Asheville, wood sam-
ples were analyzed and showed that

¢ Older decks and play sets (7 to 15 years old) that were
preserved with chromated copper arsenic expose
people to just as much arsenic on the wood surface as
do newer structures (less than 1 year old). The amount
of arsenic that testers wiped off a small area of wood
about the size of a 4-year-old’s handprint typically far
exceeds what EPA allows in a glass of water under the
Safe Drinking Water Act standard. Figure 5.9 shows a
safety warning label placed on wood products.

e Arsenic in the soil from two of every five backyards or
parks tested exceeded EPA’s Superfund cleanup level of
20 ppm.

Arsenic is not just poisonous in the short term, it causes
cancer in the long term. Arsenic is on EPA’s short list of
chemicals known to cause cancer in humans. According
to the National Academy of Sciences, exposure to arsenic

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 473: ot
C, Beat Precaution
5 Typ ond dspeecd of possi ons

Figure 5.9. Arsenic Label

causes lung, bladder, and skin cancer in humans, and is
suspected as a cause of kidney, prostate, and nasal passage
cancer.

References

1. US Environmental Protection Agency and the US
Consumer Product Safety Commission. The inside
story: a guide to indoor air quality. Washington, DC:
US Environmental Protection Agency and the US
Consumer Product Safety Commission, Office of
Radiation and Indoor Air; 1995. Document
#402-K-93-007. Available from URL: http://www.
epa.gov/iaq/pubs/insidest.html.

2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Asthma:
speaker’s kit for health care professionals; preface. Atlanta:
US Department of Health and Human Services; no date.
Available from URL: http://www.cdc.gov/asthma/speakit/

intro.htm.

3. US Environmental Protection Agency. Washington, DC:
US Environmental Protection Agency; 2004. Asthma
facts. EPA #402-F-04-019. Available from URL: http://
www.epa.gov/asthma/pdfs/asthma_fact_sheet_en.pdf-

4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Asthma:
speaker's kit for health care professionals; epidemiology.
Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human Services;
no date. Available from URL: http://www.cde.gov/

asthma/speakit/epi.htm.

5. Crain EE Walter M, O’Connor GT, Mitchell H,
Gruchalla RS, Kattan M, et al. Home and allergic
characteristics of children with asthma in seven U.S. urban
communities and design of an environmental
intervention: The Inner-City Asthma Study. Environ
Health Perspect 2002;119:939-45.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

10.

Ll.

12.

13.

14,

15.

16.

17.

18.

Community Environmental Health Resource Center.
Cockroaches: tools for detecting hazards. Washington,
DC: Community Environmental Health Resource
Center; no date. Available from URL: http://www.cehre.
org/tools/cockroaches/index.cfm.

Lyon WE Entomology, House Dust Mites HYG
2157-97. Columbus, OH: The Ohio State University
Extension; 1997. Available from URL: http://ohioline.osu.
edu/hyg-fact/2000/2157.html.

Morgan WJ, Crain EF, Gruchalla RS, O'Connor GT,
Kattan M, et al. Results of a home-based environmental
intervention among urban children with asthma. N Engl J
Med 2004;351:1068-80.

US Environmental Protection Agency. Sources of indoor
air pollution—biological pollutants. Washington, DC: US
Environmental Protection Agency; no date. Available from
URL: http://www.epa.gov/iaq/biologic.html.

Ownby DR. Exposure to dogs and cats in the first year of
life and risk of allergic sensitization at 6 to 7 years of age.
JAMA 2002;288(8):963-72.

Roost HP. Role of current and childhood exposure to cat
and atopic sensitization. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1999;104(5):94.

Downs SH. Having lived on a farm and protection
against allergic diseases in Australia. Clin Exp Allergy
2001;31(4):570-5.

Institute of Medicine. Clearing the air: asthma and indoor
air exposures. Washington, DC: National Academies Press;
2000.

American Conference of Governmental and Industrial
Hygienists. Macher J, editor. Bioaerosols: assessment and.
control. Cincinnati, OH: American Conference of
Governmental and Industrial Hygienists; 1999.

Institute of Medicine. Damp indoor spaces and health.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2004.

Morgan WJ, Crain EF, Gruchalla RS, O'Connor GT,
Kattan M, Evans R 3rd, et al. Results of home-based
environmental intervention among urban children with

asthma. N Engl J Med 2004;351:1068-80.

Burge HA, Ammann HA. Fungal toxins and £ (13)-
p-glucans. In: Macher J, editor. Bioaerosols: assessment
and control. Cincinnati, OH: American Conference of
Governmental and Industrial Hygienists; 1999.

American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on
Environmental Health. Toxic effects of indoor molds.
Pediatrics 1998;101:712-14.

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials 5-19



Page 474: 19.

20.

2

—

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

Dr

28.

5-20

Burge HA, Otten JA. 1999. Fungi. In: Macher J, editor.
Bioaerosols: assessment and control. Cincinnati, OH:
American Conference of Governmental and Industrial
Hygienists; 1999.

Etzel RA. The “fatal four” indoor air pollutants. Pediatr
Ann 2000;29(6):344-50.

. Dearborn DG, Smith PG, Dahms BB, Allan TM,

Sorenson WG, Montana E, et al. Clinical profile of thirty
infants with acute pulmonary hemorrhage in Cleveland.
Pediatrics 2002;110:627-37.

Etzel RA, Montana E, Sorenson WG, Kullman GJ, Allan
TM, Dearborn DG. Acute pulmonary hemorrhage in
infants associated with exposure to Stachybotrys atra and
other fungi. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 1998;152:757-62.

Flappan SM, Portnoy J, Jones P Barnes C. Infant
pulmonary hemorrhage in a suburban home with water
damage and mold (Stachybotrys atra). Environ Health
Perspect 1999;107:927—30.

Vesper S, Dearborn DG, Yike I, Allan T, Sobolewski J,
Hinkley SE et al. Evaluation of Stachybotrys chartarum in
the house of an infant with pulmonary hemorrhage:
quantitative assessment before, during, and after
remediation. J. Urban Health Bull N Y Acad Med
2000;77(1):68-85.

US Environmental Protection Agency. A brief guide to
mold, moisture, and your home (EPA 402-K-02-003).
Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency;
2002. Available from URL: http://www.epa.gov/iaq/
molds/images/moldguide.pdf.

NYC. 2000. Guidelines on assessment and remediation of
fungi in indoor environments. New York City
Department of Health, Bureau of Environmental &
Occupational Disease Epidemiology. Available from URL:
hetp://www.ci.nyc.ny-us/html/doh/html/epi/moldrpt1.

shtml.

Bush RK, Portnoy JM. The role and abatement of fungal
allergens in allergic diseases. J Allerg Clin Immunol Suppl
2001;107(3 pt 2):430.

Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office
of Native American Programs. Mold detection and
prevention: a guide for housing authorities in Indian
Country. Washington, DC: Department of Housing and
Urban Development; 2001. Available from URL: http://
www2.ihs.gov/IEH/documents/ HUD%20Mold%20

Detection.pdf.

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials

29.

30.

31.

32:

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

US Environmental Protection Agency. Mold remediation
in schools and commercial buildings (EPA
402-K-01-001). Washington, DC: US Environmental
Protection Agency; 2001.

Shaughnessy RJ, Morey PR. Remediation of microbial
contamination. In: Macher J, editor. Bioaerosols:
assessment and control. Cincinnati, OH: American
Conference of Governmental and Industrial Hygienists;
1999.

National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.
Interim final guidelines for the protection and training of
workers engaged in maintenance and remediation work
associated with mold. Report of a national technical
workshop, National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences, New York City, 2004 Jan 27-28.

Mott JA, Wolfe MI, Alverson CJ, Macdonald SC, Bailey
CR, Ball LB, et al. National vehicle emissions policies and
practices and declining US carbon monoxide mortality.
JAMA 2002;288:988-95.

American Lung Association. Carbon monoxide fact sheet.
New York: American Lung Association; 2004. Available
from URL: http://www.lungusa.org/site/pp.
asp?c=dvLUKIOVE&b=35375.

North Carolina Department of Health and Human
Services. Indoor ozone. Raleigh, NC: North Carolina
Department of Health and Human Services; 2003.
Available from URL: http://www.epi.state.nc.us/epi/oee/
ozone/indoorhtml.

US Environmental Protection Agency. Ozone generators
that are sold as air cleaners: an assessment of effectiveness
and health consequences. Washington, DC: US
Environmental Protection Agency; no date. Available from
URL: http://www.epa.gov/iaq/pubs/ozonegen.html.

National Cancer Institute. Secondhand smoke: questions
and answers. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute;
no date. Available from URL: http://www.cancer.gov/
cancertopics/factsheet/Tobacco/ETS.

US Environmental Protection Agency. What you can do
about secondhand smoke as parents, decision-makers, and
building occupants. Washington, DC: US Environmental
Protection Agency; 1993. Available from URL: http://

www.epa.gov/smokefree/pubs/etsbro.html.

US Environmental Protection Agency. Methylene chloride
(dichloromethane). Washington, DC: US Environmental
Protection Agency; 1992. Available from URL: http://
www.epa.gov/ttnatw0 1/hithef/methylen.html.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 475: 39.

40.

4l.

42.

43,

44,

45.

46.

47.

48.

Environmental Media Services. Four to avoid.
Washington, DC: Environmental Media Services; 2002.

US Consumer Product Safety Commission. An update on
formaldehyde: 1997 revision. Washington, DC:
Consumer Product Safety Commission; 1997. CPSC
Document 725. Available from URL: http://www.cpsc.
gov/cpscpub/pubs/725.html.

US Environmental Protection Agency. Sources of indoor
air pollution—formaldehyde. Washington, DC: US
Environmental Protection Agency. Available from URL:
hetp://www.epa.gov/iaq/formalde.html.

US Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Formaldehyde emission controls for certain wood
products. 24 CFR3280.308. Washington, DC: US
Department of Housing and Urban Development;
2001. Available from URL: http://www.hudclips.org/cgi/
index.cgi.

US Environmental Protection Agency. Assessment of risks
from radon in homes. Washington, DC: US
Environmental Protection Agency; 2003. Available from
URL: http://www.epa.gov/radon/risk_assessment.html.

US Geological Survey. The geology of radon. Reston, VA:
US Geological Survey; 1995. Available from URL: http://
energy.cr.usgs.gov/tadon/georadon/3.html.

California Geological Survey. Radon. Sacramento, CA:
California Geological Survey; no date. Available from
URL: http://www.consrv.ca.gov/ cgs/minerals/hazardous
minerals/radon/.

US Department of Health and Human Services. Surgeon
General releases national health advisory on radon.
Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human
Services; 2005. Available from URL: http://www.hhs.gov/
surgeongeneral/pressreleases/sg01132005.html.

Brain M, Freudenrich C. How radon works. Atlanta:
How Stuff Works; no date. Available from URL: http://
home.howstuffworks.com/radon.htm.

Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
Mitigating your home or office. Harrisburg, PA:
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection;
no date. Available from URL: http://www.dep.state.pa.us/
dep/deputate/airwaste/rp/radon_division/Mitigation_Info.
htm.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

49,

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

Connecticut Department of Public Health. Why should
you build homes with radon-resistant techniques?
Hartford, CT: Connecticut Department of Public Health
Radon Program; no date. Available from URL: http://
www.dph.state.ct.us/BRS/radon/radon_techniques.htm.

US Environmental Protection Agency. Radon-resistant
new construction. Washington, DC: US Environmental
Protection Agency; no date. Available from URL: http://

www.epa.gov/radon/construc.html.

US Environmental Protection Agency. Pesticides and child
safety. Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection
Agency; no date. Available from URL: http://www.epa.
gov/pesticides/factsheets/childsaf.htm.

Delaplane KS. Pesticide usage in the United States: history,
benefits, risks, and trends. Athens, GA: Cooperative
Extension Service, The University of Georgia College of
Agriculture and Environmental Sciences; no date.
Available from URL: http://pubs.caes.uga.edu/caespubs/
pubcd/B1121.htm.

US Environmental Protection Agency. Sources of indoor
air pollution—pesticides. Washington, DC: US
Environmental Protection Agency; no date. Available from
URL: http://www.epa.gov/iaq/pesticid.html.

Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. Public
health statement for asbestos. Atlanta: US Department of
Health and Human Services; 2001. Available from URL:
hetp://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/phs61.html.

US Geological Survey. Some facts about asbestos. USGS
fact sheet FS-012-01, online version 1.1. Reston, VA: US
Geological Survey; March 2001. Available from URL:
http://pubs.usgs.gov/fs/fs012-01/.

Merriam-Webster, Inc. Merriam-Webster dictionary.
Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster, Inc.; no date.
Available from URL: http://www.m-w.com/home.htm.

Jacobs DE, Clickner RP, Zhou JY, Viet SM, Marker DA,
Rogers JW, et al. The prevalence of lead-based paint
hazards in U.S. housing. Environ Health Perspect
2002;100:A599-606.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Blood lead
levels in residents of homes with elevated lead in tap
water— District of Columbia, 2004. MMWR 2004;
53(12):268-70. Available from URL: http://www.cde.gov/
mmwt/preview/ mmwrhtml/mm5312a6.htm.

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials 5-21



Page 476: 59.

60.

6l.

62.

63.

64.

65.

5-22

National Research Council. Measuring lead exposure in
infants, children and other sensitive populations.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1993.

Centers for Disease Control. Preventing lead poisoning in
young children. Report No. 99-2230. Atlanta: US
Department of Health and Human Services; 1991.

US Department of Housing and Urban Development.
HUD technical guidelines for the evaluation and control
of lead-based paint hazards in housing. Washington, DC:
US Department of Housing and Urban Development;
1995. Available from URL: http://www.hud.gov/oftices/
lead/guidelines/hudguidelines/index.cfm.

US Department of Housing and Urban Development.
The lead-based paint disclosure rule (Section 1018 of the
Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of
1992). Washington, DC: US Department of Housing
and Urban Development; no date. Available from URL:
hetp://www.hud.gov/oftices/lead/disclosurerule/index.cfm.

Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of
1992, Title X of the Housing and Community
Development Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-550 (Oct 28,
1992).

Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Lead
exposure in construction: interim final rule. Fed Reg
1993;58:26590-649.

Environmental Working Group. Nationwide consumer
testing of backyard decks and play sets shows high levels of
arsenic on old wood. Washington, DC: Environmental
Working Group; 2002. Available from URL: http://www.
ewg.org/reports/allhandsondeck/.

Chapter 5: Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic Materials

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 477: “The Palace of Fine Arts in Mexico City has sunk more than
10 feet into the ground since it was built 60 years ago and
the most noticeable effect is that the grand stone stairway has
disappeared and the entrance is now at street level.”

C.B. Crawford,
Canadian Building Digest

Introduction

The principal function of a house is to provide protection
from the elements. Our present society, however, requires
that a home provide not only shelter, but also privacy,
safety, and reasonable protection of our physical and
mental health. A living facility that fails to offer these
essentials through adequately designed and properly
maintained interiors and exteriors cannot be termed

“healthful housing.”

In this chapter, the home is considered in terms of the
parts that have a bearing on its soundness, state of repair,
and safety. These are some of the elements that the hous-
ing inspector must examine when making a thorough
housing inspection.

Figure 6.1 shows a typical house being built and
inspected today and includes a terminology key. Both the

Chapter 6: Housing Structure

figure and the key are available in an interactive format in
the glossary on the U.S. Inspect Web site [1].

Figure 6.2 shows a typical house built between 1950 and
1980 and also includes a terminology key. The figures
show the complexity and the numerous components of a
home. These components form the vocabulary that is
necessary to discuss housing structure inspection issues.

Key to Figure 6.1 (New Housing Terminology)

1. Ash dump (see 35)—A door or opening in the firebox
that leads directly to the ash pit, through which the ashes
are swept after the fire is burned out. All fireboxes are not
equipped with an ash dump.

2. Attic space—The open space within the attic area.

3. Backfill—The material used to refill an excavation around
the outside of a foundation wall or pipe trench.

4. Baluster—One of a series of small pillars that is attached
to and runs between the stairs and the handrails. The
spacing between the balusters should be less than 4 inches
to prevent small children from getting stuck between the
balusters. Balusters are considered a safety item and
provide an additional barrier.

Figure 6.1. Housing Structure Terminology, Typical House Being Built Today [1]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Chapter 6: Housing Structure 6-1



Page 478: 10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.

6-2

Baseboard trim—Typically a wood trim board that is
placed against the wall around the perimeter of a room
next to the floor. The intent is to conceal the joint
between the floor and wall finish.

Basement window—A window opening installed in the
basement wall. Basement windows are occasionally below
the finish grade level and will be surrounded on the

exterior by a window well.

Blind or shutter—A lightweight frame in the form of a
door located on each side of a window. They are most
commonly constructed of wood (solid or louvered panels)
or plastic. Originally they were designed to close and
secure over the windows for security and foul weather.
Most shutters now are more likely decorative pieces that
are secured to the house beside the windows.

Bridging—Small pieces of wood or metal strapping
placed in an X-pattern between the floor joists at midspan
to prevent the joists from twisting and squeaking and to
provide reinforcement and distribution of stress.

Building paper/underlayment—Building material,
usually a felt paper that is used as a protective barrier
against air and moisture passage from the area beneath the
flooring as well as providing a movement/noise isolator in
hardwood flooring.

Ceiling joist—A horizontally placed framing members at
the ceiling of the top-most living space of a house that
provides a platform to which the finished ceiling material
can be attached.

Chair rail (not shown)— Decorative trim applied around
the perimeter of a room such as a formal dining room or
kitchen/breakfast nook at the approximate same height as
the back of a chair. It is sometimes used as a cap trim for
wainscoting (see wainscoting).

Chimney—A masonry or in more modern construction
wood framed enclosure that surrounds and contains one
or more flues and extends above the roofline.

Chimney cap—The metal or masonry protective
coveringat the top of the chimney that seals the chimney
shaft from water entry between the chimney enclosure and
the flue tiles.

Chimney flues—The space or channel in a chimney that
carries off the smoke and other combustion gases to the
outside air. Most homes will have a terra cotta tile flue or a
metal flue.

Collar beam/tie—A horizontal piece of framing lumber
that provides intermediate support for opposite rafters.

Chapter 6: Housing Structure

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21;

22.

23:

24.

25.

26.

They are usually located in the middle to upper third
portion of the rafters. It is also known as a collar beam or
collar brace.

Concrete slab floor—Typically approximately 4 inches
thick, the concrete slab floor provides a number of uses. It
creates a solid level surface to walk and work on. It
provides a separation between the grade/soil and a
potentially livable area. It also provides lateral compression
resistance for the foundation walls, preventing soil pressure
from outside the foundation from pushing the foundation
walls and footings inward.

Corner brace—Diagonal braces placed at the corners of
framed walls to stiffen them and provide extra strength.

Cornice—An overhang of a pitched roof at the eave line
that usually consists of a fascia board, a soffit, and any
appropriate moldings or vents.

Cornice molding—The individual pieces of wood trim

that are applied to the cornice area at the eaves.

Door casing/trim—The finish trim details around the
perimeter of the door on the interior finished wall.

Door frame/jamb—The top and sides of the door to
include the wall framing as well as the actual door frame
and trim.

Downspout—A pipe, usually of metal or vinyl, that is
connected to the gutters and is used to carry the
roof-water runoff down and away from the house.

Downspout gooseneck—Segmented section of
downspout that is bent at a radius to allow the downspout
to be attached to the house and to follow the bends and
curves of the eaves and ground.

Downspout shoe—The bottom downspout gooseneck
that directs the water from the downspout to the
extension or splash block at the grade.

Downspout strap—Strap used to secure the downspout
to the side of the house.

Drain tile—A tube or cylinder that is normally installed
around the exterior perimeter of the foundation footings
that collects and directs ground water away from the
foundation of the house. The tile can be individual
sections of clay or asphalt tubing or, in more recent
construction, a perforated-plastic drain tile that is
approximately 4 inches in diameter. The drain tile leads
either towards a sump or to an exterior discharge away
from the house.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 479: 27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34,

35.

Entrance canopy—A small overhanging roof that shelters
the front entrance.

Entrance stoop—An elevated platform constructed of
wood framing or masonry at the front entry that allows
visitors to stand above or out of the elements. The
platform should be wide enough to allow someone to
stand on the platform while opening an outward swinging
door such as a storm door even if one is not present.

Exterior siding—The decorative exterior finish on a
house. Its primary function is to protect the shell of the
house from the elements. The choice of siding materials
varies widely to include wood, brick, metal, vinyl,
concrete, stucco, and a variety of manufactured
compositions such as compressed wood, compressed
cellulose (paper), fiber-reinforced cement, and synthetic
stucco.

Fascia—The visible flat front board that caps the rafter
tail ends and encloses the overhang under the eave that
runs along the roof edge. The gutter is usually attached at
this location.

Fascia/rake board—The visible flat front board that caps
the rafter tail ends and encloses the overhang under the
eave that runs along the roof edge and at the edge of the
roofing at the gables. The gutter is usually attached to this
board at the eaves.

Finish flooring (not shown)—The final floor covering
inside the living space of a house. The most common
types of finishes are carpeting; hardwood flooring; ceramic,
composite, or laminate stone tile; parquet panels; or vinyl
sheet flooring.

Finished grade line—A predetermined line indicating the
proposed elevation of the ground surface around a
building.

Firebox—The cavity in the open face of the fireplace in
which the fire is maintained. The firebox leads directly to
the fireplace flue. The firebox is constructed of fire or
refractory brick set in fireclay or reinforced mortar in
traditional masonry fireplaces. The firebox may also be
constructed of metal or ceramic-coated metal panels in
more modern prefabricated fireplaces. The walls of the
firebox are usually slanted toward the living space both to
direct smoke up toward the flue and to reflect heat into
the room.

Fireplace cleanout door—The access door to the ash pit
beneath the fireplace. On a fireplace that is located inside
the house, the cleanout door is usually located in the
lowest accessible level of the house such as the basement or

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

36.

EVE

38.

39.

40.

4l.

42.

43.

44,

45.

crawl space. On a fireplace that is located at the outside of
the house, the cleanout door will be located at the exterior
of the chimney. Not all fireplaces are equipped with a

cleanout door.

Fireplace hearth—The inner or outer floor of a fireplace,
usually made of brick, tile, or stone.

Flashing (not shown)—The building component used to
connect and cover portions of a deck, roof, or siding
material to another surface such as a wall, a chimney, a
vent pipe, or anywhere that runoff is heavy or where two
dissimilar materials meet. The flashing is mainly intended
to prevent water entry and is usually made of rubber, tar,
asphalt, or various metals.

Floor joists—The main subfloor framing members that
support the floor span. Joists are usually made of
engineered wood I-beams or 2x8 or larger lumber.

Foundation footing—The base on which the foundation
walls rests. The foundation is wider than the foundation
wall to spread out the load it is bearing and to help
prevent settling.

Foundation wall—The concrete block, concrete slab or
other nonwood material that extends below or partly
below grade, which provides support for exterior walls and
other structural pans of the building.

Framing studs—A 2x4 or 2x6 vertical framing member
used to construct walls and partitions, usually spaced 12 to
24 inches apart.

Gable framing—The vertical and horizontal framing
members that make up and support the end of a building
as distinguished from the front or rear side. A gable is the
triangular end of an exterior wall above the eaves.

Garage door—The door for the vehicle passage into the
garage area. Typical garage doors consist of multiple
jointed panels of wood, metal, or fiberglass.

Girder—A large beam supporting floor joists at the same
level as the sills. A larger or principal beam used to support
concentrated loads at isolated points along its length.

Gravel fill—A bed of coarse rock fragments or pebbles
that is laid atop the existing soil before pouring the
concrete slab. The gravel serves a dual purpose of breaking
surface tension on the concrete slab and providing a layer
that interrupts capillary action of subsurface moisture from
reaching the concrete slab. Typically, a polyethylene
sheeting will be installed between the gravel fill and the
concrete slab for further moisture proofing.

6-3

Chapter 6: Housing Structure



Page 480: 46.

47.

48.

49,

50.

5

52.

53.

54.

6-4

Gutter—A channel used for carrying water run-off.
Usually located at the eaves of a house and connected to a
downspout. The primary purpose of the gutters and
downspouts is to carry roof water run-off as far away from
the house as possible.

Insulation—A manufactured or natural material that
resists heat flow that is installed in a house’s shell to keep
the heat in a house in the winter and the coolness in the
house in the summer. The most common form of
insulation is fiberglass, whether in batts or blown-in
material, along with cellulose, rigid foam boards,

sprayed-in foam, and rock wool.

Jack/king stud—The framing stud, sometimes called the
trimmer, that supports the header above a window, door,
or other opening within a bearing wall. Depending on the
size of the opening, there may be several jack studs on
either side of the opening.

Mantel—The ornamental or decorative facing around a
fireplace including a shelf that is attached to the breast or
backing wall above the fireplace.

Moisture/vapor barrier—A nonporous material, such as
plastic or polyethylene sheeting, that is used to retard the
movement of water vapor into walls and attics and prevent
condensation in them. A vapor barrier is also installed in
crawl space areas to prevent moisture vapor from entering

up through the ground.

Newel post—The post at the top and bottom of the
handrails and anywhere along the stair run that creates a
directional change in the handrails is called the newel post.
The newel post is securely anchored into the underlying
floor framing or the stair stringer to provide stability to the

handrails.

Reinforcing lath—A strip of wood or metal attached to
studs and used as a foundation for plastering, slating or
tiling. Lath has been replaced by gypsum board in most

modern construction.

Ridge board/beam—The board placed on edge at the
top-most point of the roof framing, into which the upper
ends of the rafters are joined or attached.

Roofing—The finished surface at the top of the house
that must be able to withstand the effects of the elements
(i.e. wind, rain, snow, hail, etc.). A wide variety of
materials are available, including asphalt shingles, wood
shakes, metal roofing, ceramic and concrete tiles, and slate,
with asphalt shingles making up the bulk of the material
used.

Chapter 6: Housing Structure

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

6l.

62.

63.

64.

65

66.

67.

Roof rafters—Inclined structural framing members that
support the roof, running from the exterior wall the to the
tidge beam. Rafters directly support the roof sheathing
and create the angle or slope of the roof:

Roof sheathing—The material used to cover the outside
surface of the roof framing to provide lateral and rack
support to the roof, as well as to provide a nailing surface
for the roofing material. This material most commonly

consists of plywood OSB or horizontally laid wood
boards.

Sidewalk—A walkway that provides a direct, all-weather
approach to an entry. The sidewalk can be constructed of
poured concrete, laid stone, concrete pavers, or gravel
contained between borders or curbs.

Sill plate—The horizontal wood member that is
anchored to the foundation masonry to provide a nailing
surface for floors or walls built above.

Silt fabric—A porous fabric that acts as a barrier between
the backfilled soil (see backfill) and the gravel surrounding
the drain tile. This barrier prevents soil particles from
blocking the movement of groundwater to the drain tile.

Soffit/lookout block—Rake cross-bracing between the
fly rafters and end gable rafters that the soffit is nailed to.

Stair rail—A sturdy handhold and barrier that follows the
outside, and sometimes inside, perimeter of the stairs. The
stair rail is used to prevent falls and to provide a means of
additional support when walking up or down the stairs.

Stair riser-—The vertical boards that close the space
between each stair tread on a set of stairs (see stair stringer
and stair tread).

Stair stringer—The supporting members in a set of stairs
that are cut or notched to accept the individual treads and
risers (see stair riser and stair tread).

Stair tread—The horizontal board in a stairway that is
walked upon (see stair riser and stair stringer).

. Subfloor—Boards or plywood, installed over joists, on

which the finish floor rests.

Support post—A vertical framing member usually
designed to carry or support a beam or girder. In newer
construction a metal lally (pronounced “lolly”) column is
commonly used, as well as 4x4- or 6x6-inch wood posts.

Tar—Otherwise known as asphalt, tar is a very thick, dark
brown/black substance that is used as a sealant or
waterproofing agent. It is usually produced naturally by
the breakdown of animal and vegetable matter that has

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 481: 68.

69.

70.

71s

72.

been buried and compressed deep underground. Tar is
also manufactured— a hydrocarbon by-product or residue
that is left over after the distillation of petroleum. It is
commonly used as a sealant or patch for roof penetrations,
such as plumbing vents and chimney flashing. Tar is also
used as a sealer on concrete and masonry foundation walls
before they have been backfilled.

Termite shield— A metal flashing that is installed below
the sill plate that acts as a deterrent to keep termites from
reaching the sill plate.

Top plate— The topmost horizontal framing members of
a framed wall. Most construction practices require the top
plate to be doubled in thickness.

‘Wainscoting— The wooden paneling of the lower part of
an interior wall up to approximately waist-height or
between 36 and 48 inches from the floor.

Wall insulation— A manufactured or natural material
that resists heat flow that is installed in a house's shell to
keep the heat in a house in the winter and the coolness in
the house in the summer. Fiberglass batts are the most
common form of wall insulation.

Wall sheathing— The material used to cover the outside
surface of the wall framing that provides lateral and shear

support to the wall as well as a nailing surface for the
exterior siding.

73. Window casing/trim— The finish trim details around

the perimeter of the window on the interior finished wall.

74. Window cripple— Short studs placed between the header

and a top plate or between a sill and sole plate.

75. Window frame/jamb— The top and sides of the

window, to include the wall framing and the actual

window frame and trim.

76. Window header—A beam placed perpendicular to wall

studs above doors, windows, or other openings to carry
the weight of structural loads above the window or door.

77. Window sash— The framework that holds the glass in a

door or window.

78. Window well (not shown)— An excavation around a
basement window that prevents the surrounding soils
from collapsing into the window. The window well
surround is normally constructed of formed corrugated
galvanized metal, built-up masonry, or pressure-treated
wood.

Figure 6.2. Housing Structure and Terminology, Typical House Built Between 1950 and 1980 [2]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Chapter 6: Housing Structure 6-5



Page 482: Key to Figure 6.2 (Old Housing Terminology)

Fireplace

1.

Chimney— A vertical masonry shaft of reinforced
concrete or other approved noncombustible, heat resisting
material enclosing one or more flues. It removes the
products of combustion from solid, liquid or gaseous fuel.

2. Flue liner—The flue is the hole in the chimney. The
liner, made of terra cotta or metal, protects the brick from
harmful smoke gases.

3. Chimney cap— This top is generally of concrete. It
protects the brick from weather.

4, Chimney flashing— Sheet metal flashing provides a tight
joint between chimney and roof.

5. Firebrick— An ordinary brick cannot withstand the heat
of direct fire, and so special firebrick is used to line the
fireplace. In newer construction, fireplaces are constructed
of prefabricated metal inserts.

6. Ash dump—A trap door to let the ashes drop to a pit
below, where they may be easily removed.

7. Cleanout door— The door to the ash pit or the bottom
of a chimney through which the chimney can be cleaned.

8. Chimney breast— The inside face or front of a fireplace
chimney.

9. Hearth—The floor of a fireplace that extends into the
room for safety purposes.

Roof

1

6-6

0. Ridge—The top intersection of two opposite adjoining

roof surfaces.

. Ridge board— The board that follows along under the
ridge.

—

2. Roof rafters— The structural members that support the
roof.

3. Collar beam— Not a beam at all; this tie keeps the roof
from spreading and connects similar rafters on opposite
sides of the roof.

4. Roof insulation— An insulating material (usually rock
wool or fiberglass) in a blanket form placed between the
roof rafters to keep a house warm in the winter and cool
in the summer.

5. Roof sheathing— The boards that provide the base for
the finished roof. In newer construction, roof sheathing is
composed of sheets of plywood, or oriented strand board
(OSB).

Chapter 6: Housing Structure

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

2I,

22,

23:

Roofing— The wood, asphalt or asbestos shingles— or
tile, slate, or metal—that form the outer protection
against the weather.

Cornice—A decorative element made of molded
members, usually placed at or near the top of an exterior
or interior wall.

Gutter— The trough that gathers rainwater from a roof.

Downspout— The pipe that leads the water down from
the gutter.

Storm sewer tile—The underground pipe that receives
the water from the downspouts and carries it to the sewer.
In newer construction, plastic-type material have replaced
tile.

Gable— The triangular end of a building with a sloping

roof.

Barage board— The fascia or board at the gable just
under the edge of the roof:

Louvers—A series of slanted slots arranged to keep out
rain, yet allow ventilation.

Walls and Floors

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

Corner post—The vertical member at the corner of the
frame, made up to receive inner and outer covering
materials.

Studs—The vertical wood members of the house, usually
2x4s at minimum and spaced every 16 inches.

Sill— The board that is laid first on the foundation, and
on which the frame rests.

Plate— The board laid across the top ends of the studs to
hold them even and tight.

Corner bracing— Diagonal strips to keep the frame
square and plumb.

Sheathing— The first layer of outer wall covering nailed
to the studs.

Joist— The structural members or beams that hold up the
floor or ceiling, usually 2x10s or 2x12s spaced
16 inches apart.

Bridging— Cross-bridging or solid. Members at the
middle or third points of joist spans to brace one to the
next and to prevent them from twisting.

Subflooring— Typically plywood or particle wood that is
laid over the joists.

Flooring paper—A felt paper laid on the rough floor to

stop air infiltration and, to some extent, noise.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 483: 34. Finish flooring— Hardwood, of tongued and grooved
strips, carpet, or vinyl products (tile, linoleum).

35. Building paper or sheathing— Paper or plasticized
material placed outside the sheathing, not as a vapor
barrier, but to prevent water and air from leaking in.
Building paper is also used as a tarred felt under shingles
or siding to keep out moisture or wind.

36. Beveled siding— Sometimes called clapboards, with a
thick butt and a thin upper edge lapped to shed water. In
newer construction, vinyl, aluminum, or fiber cement
siding and stucco are more prevalent.

37. Wall insulation— A blanket of wool or reflective foil
placed inside the walls.

38. Metal lath—A mesh made from sheet metal onto which
plaster or other composite surfacing materials can be
applied. In newer construction, plaster sheetrock 4-x8-foot
sheets have replaced lath.

Foundation and Basement

39. Finished grade line— The top of the ground at the
foundation.

40. Foundation wall— The wall of poured concrete (shown)
or concrete blocks that rests on the footing and supports
the remainder of the house.

4

aan

. Termite shield—A metal baffle to prevent termites from
entering the frame.

42. Footing— The concrete pad that carries the entire weight
of the house upon the earth.

43. Footing drain tile—A pipe with cracks at the joints, or
perforated plastic pipe to allow underground water to
drain away before it gets into the basement.

44, Basement floor slab— The 4- or 5-inch layer of concrete
that forms the basement floor.

45. Gravel fill—Placed under the slab to allow drainage and
to guard against a damp floor.

46. Girder—A main beam upon which floor joists rest.
Usually of steel, but also of wood.

47. Backfill— Earth, once dug out, that has been replaced
and tamped down around the foundation.

48. Areaway— An open space to allow light and air to a
window. Also called a light well.

49, Area wall— The wall, of metal or concrete, that forms the

open area.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Windows and Doors

50. Window— An opening in a building for admitting light
and air. It usually has a pane or panes of glass and is set in
a frame or sash that is generally movable for opening and
shutting.

51. Window frame— The lining of the window opening.

52. Window sash— The inner frame, usually movable, that
holds the glass.

53. Lintel— The structural beam over a window or door
opening.

54. Window casing— The decorative strips surrounding a
window opening on the inside.

Stairs and Entry
55. Entrance canopy—A roof extending over the entrance
door.

56. Furring— Falsework or framework necessary to bring the
outer surface level to the inner surface.

57. Stair tread— The horizontal part of a step that the foot
hits when climbing up or down the stairs.

58. Stair riser— The vertical board connecting one tread to
the next.

59. Stair stringer— The sloping board that supports the ends
of the steps.

60. Newel— The post that terminates the railing.
61. Stair rail— The bar used for a handhold when using the

stairs.

62. Balusters— Vertical rods or spindles supporting a rail.

Foundation

The word “foundation” is used to mean

* construction below grade, such as footings, cellar, or
basement;

* the composition of the earth on which the building
rests; and

* special construction, such as pilings and piers used to
support the building.

The foundation bed may be composed of solid rock, sand,
gravel, or unconsolidated sand or clay. Rock, sand, or
gravel are the most reliable foundation materials. Figure
6.3 shows the three most common foundations for homes.
Unconsolidated sand and clay, though found in many sec-
tions of the country, are not as desirable for foundations

Chapter 6: Housing Structure 6-7



Page 484: because they are subject to sliding and settling [1].
Capillary breaks have been identified as a key way of
reducing moisture incursion in new construction [3].

The footing distributes the weight of the building over a
sufficient area of ground to ensure that the foundation
walls will stand properly. Footings are usually concrete;
however, in the past, wood and stone have been used.
Some older houses were constructed without footings.

Although it is usually difficult to determine the condition
of a footing without excavating the foundation, a footing
in a state of disrepair or lack of a footing will usually be
indicated either by large cracks or by settlement in the
foundation walls. This type of crack is called a “Z” crack.

Foundation wall cracks are usually diagonal, starting from
the top, the bottom, or the end of the wall (Figure 6.4).

Figure 6.3. Foundation [3]

6-8 Chapter 6: Housing Structure

Cracks that do not extend
to at least one edge of the
wall may not be caused by
foundation problems. Such
wall cracks may be due to
other structural problems
and should also be reported.

CRACKS IN THE MASONRY FOUNDATION WALL
ALONG THE MASONRY JOINTS,

DIFFERENTIAL SETTLEMENT OF
‘THE END OF THE WALL.

The foundation walls sup-
port the weight of the struc-
ture and transfer this weight
to the footings. The foun-
dation walls may be made
of stone, brick, concrete, or
concrete blocks. The exte-
rior should be moisture
proofed with either a mem-
brane of waterproof mate-
rial or a coating of portland
cement mortar. The mem-
brane may consist of plastic
sheeting or a sandwich of
standard roofing felt joined
and covered with tar or
asphalt. The purpose of
waterproofing the foundation and walls is to prevent
water from penetrating the wall material and leaving the
basement or cellar walls damp.

DIFFERENTIAL SETTLEMENT OF
THE END OF THE WALL.

DIFFERENTIAL SETTLEMENT OF
THE MIDDLE PORTION OF THE WALL.

Figure 6.4. Foundation Cracks [4]

Holes in the foundation walls are common in many old
houses. These holes may be caused by missing bricks or
blocks. Holes and cracks in a foundation wall are undesir-
able because they make a convenient entry for rats and
other rodents and also indicate the possibility of further
structural deterioration. Basement problems are a major
complaint of homeowners [4-9].

Concrete is naturally porous (12%—-18% air). When it
cures, surplus water creates a network of interconnected
capillaries. These pores let in liquid water, water vapor,
and radon gas. Like a sponge, concrete draws water from
several feet away. As concrete ages, the pores get bigger as
a result of freezing, thawing, and erosion.

Concrete paints, waterproofing sealers, or cement coat-
ings are a temporary fix. They crack or peel and cannot
stop gases such as water vapor and radon.

Damp basement air spreads mold and radon through the
house. Efflorescence (white powder stains) and musty
odors are telltale signs of moisture problems.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 485: Basement remodeling traps invisible water vapor, causing
mold and mildew. Most basements start leaking within
10 to 15 years. The basement walls and floors should be
sealed and preserved before they deteriorate. The base-
ment floor should be concrete placed on at least 6 inches
of gravel. The gravel distributes groundwater movement
under the concrete floor, reducing the possibility of the
water penetrating the floor. A waterproof membrane,
such as plastic sheeting, should be laid before the con-
crete is placed for additional protection against flooding
and the infiltration of radon and other gases.

The basement floor should be gradually, but uniformly,
sloped from all directions toward a drain or a series of
drains. These drains permit the basement or cellar to
drain if it becomes flooded.

Water or moisture marks on the floor and walls are signs
of ineffective waterproofing or moisture proofing. Cellar
doors, hatchways, and basement windows should be
weather-tight and rodent-proof. A hatchway can be
inspected by standing at the lower portion with the doors
closed; if daylight can be seen, the door needs to be
sealed or repaired.

Vapor Barriers

Crawl Space Vapor Barriers

Throughout the United States, even in desert areas, there
is moisture in the ground from groundwater being
absorbed. Even in an apparently dry crawl space, a large
amount of water is entering. The moisture is drying out
as fast as it is entering, which causes high moisture levels
in the crawl space and elsewhere in the house. A solid
vapor barrier is recommended in all crawl spaces and
should be required if moisture problems exist [10]. This
vapor barrier, if properly installed, also reduces the infil-
tration of radon gas. Of course, if the moisture is coming
from above ground, a vapor barrier will collect and hold
the moisture. Therefore, any source of moisture must be
found and eliminated. The source may be as obvious as
sweating pipes, or may be more difficult to spot, such as
condensation on surfaces. The solution can be as simple
as applying insulation to exposed sections of the piping or
complex enough to require power exhaust fans and the
addition of insulation and vapor barriers.

The more common causes of moisture problems in a new
home are moisture trapped within the structure during
construction and a continuing source of excess moisture
from the basement, crawl space, or slab. To resolve this

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

potential problem, 6-mil plastic sheets should be laid as
vapor barriers over the entire crawl space floor. The sheets
should overlap each other by at least 6 inches and should
be taped in place. The plastic should extend up the
perimeter walls by about 6 inches. The plastic sheets
should be attached to the interior walls of the crawl space
with mastic or batten strips. All of the perimeter walls
should be insulated, and insulation should be between
the joists at the top of the walls. Vents, which may need
to be opened in the late spring and closed in the fall,
should not be blocked. If not properly managed, mois-
ture originating in the crawl space can cause problems
with wood flooring and create many biologic threats to
health and property. A properly placed vapor barrier can
prevent or reduce problem moisture from entering the
home.

Vapor Barriers for Concrete Slab Homes

Strip flooring and related products should be protected
from moisture migration by a slab. Proper on-grade or
above-grade construction requires that a vapor barrier be
placed beneath the slab. Moisture tests should be done to
determine the suitability of the slab before installing
wood products. A vapor barrier equivalent to 4- or 6-mil
polyethylene should be installed on top of the slab to fur-
ther protect the wood products and the residents of the
home.

Wall and Ceiling Vapor Barriers

Wall and ceiling vapor barriers should go on the heated
side of the insulation and are necessary in cold climates.
Water vapor flows from areas of high pressure (indoors in
winter) through the wall to an area of low pressure (out-
doors in winter). People and their pets produce amazing
quantities of water vapor by breathing. Additional mois-
ture in considerable quantities is created in the home
from everyday activities such as washing clothes, cooking,
and personal hygiene. The purpose of the vapor barrier is
to prevent this moisture from entering the wall and freez-
ing, then draining, causing damage. In addition, wet
insulation has very little insulating value. Insulation with
the vapor barrier misplaced will allow the vapor to con-
dense in the insulation and then freeze. In cold climates,
this ice can actually build up all winter and run out on
the floor in the spring. Such moisture buildup blisters
paint, rots sheathing, and destroys the insulating value of
insulation.

Chapter 6: Housing Structure 6-9



Page 486: House Framing

Many types of house-framing systems are found in
various sections of the country; however, most framing
systems include the elements described in this section.

Foundation Sills

The purpose of the sill is to provide support or a bearing
surface for the outside walls of the building. The sill is
the first part of the frame to be placed and rests directly
on the foundation wall. It is often bolted to the founda-
tion wall by sill anchors. In many homes, metal straps are
cemented into the foundation wall that are bent around
and secured to the sill. It is good practice to protect the
sill against termites by extending the foundation wall to
at least 18 inches above the ground and using a noncor-
roding metal shield continuously around the outside top
of the foundation wall.

Flooring Systems

The flooring system is composed of a combination of
girders, joists, subflooring, and finished flooring that may
be made up of concrete, steel, or wood. Joists are laid per-
pendicular to the girders, at about 16 inches on center,
and the subflooring is attached to them. If the subfloor is
wood, it may be nailed, glued, or screwed at either right
angles or diagonally to the joists. Many homes are built
with wood I-joists or trusses rather on than solid wood
joists.

In certain framing systems, a girder supports the joists
and is usually a larger section than the joists it supports.
Girders are found in framing systems where there are no
interior bearing walls or where the span between bearing
walls is too great for the joists. The most common appli-
cation of a girder is to support the first floor. Often a
board known as a ledger is applied to the side of a wood
girder or beam to form a ledge for the joists to rest upon.
The girder, in turn, is supported by wood posts or steel
“Jally columns” that extend from the cellar or basement
floor to the girder.

Studs

For years, wall studs were composed of wood and were
2x4 inches; but, with the demand for greater energy effi-
ciency in homes, that standard no longer holds true.
Frame studs up to 6 inches wide are used to increase the
area available for placing insulation material. The increased
size in the studs allow for larger spaces between joists.

There are now alternatives to conventional wood studs,
specifically, insulated concrete forms, structural insulated

6-10 Chapter 6: Housing Structure

panels, light-gauge steel, and combined steel and wood
[11-13]. The advantages of light-gauge steel include the
following:

° weighs 60% less than equivalent wood units and has
greater strength and durability;

* is impervious to termites and other damage-causing
pests;

° stays true and does not warp;
* is noncombustible; and
* is recyclable.
The disadvantages of steel include these:

¢ steel is an excellent thermal conductor and requires
additional external insulation;

* as a new product, it is unfamiliar to craftsmen,
engineers, and code officials; and

° a different type of construction tools are required.
P'

The combined steel and wood framing system includes
light-gauge steel studs with 6-inch wooden stud pieces
attached to the top and bottom to allow easy attachment
to traditional wood frame materials.

There are two types of walls or partitions: bearing and
nonbearing. A bearing wall is constructed at right angles
to support the joists. A nonbearing wall, or partition, acts
as a screen or enclosure; hence, the headers in it are often
parallel to the joists of the floor above.

In general, studs, like joists, are spaced 16 inches on cen-
ter. In light construction, such as garages and summer
cottages, wider spacing on studs is common.

Openings for windows or doors must be framed in studs.
This framing consists of horizontal members (headers)
and vertical members (trimmers or jack studs).

Because the vertical spaces between studs can act as flues
to transmit flames in the event of a fire, fire stops are
important in preventing or retarding fire from spreading
through a building by way of air passages in walls, floors,
and partitions. Fire stops are wood obstructions placed
between studs or floor joists to block fire from spreading
in these natural flue spaces.

Interior Walls

Many types of materials are used for covering interior
walls and ceilings, but the principal type is drywall. The
generic term “drywall” is typically used when talking
about gypsum board. It is also called wallboard or referred

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 487: to by the brand name Sheetrock. Gypsum board is a sheet
material composed of a gypsum filler faced with paper. In
drywall construction, gypsum boards are fastened to the
studs either vertically or horizontally and then painted.
The edges along the length of the sheet are slightly

recessed to receive joint cement and tape.

Drywall finish, composed of gypsum board, is a material
that requires little, if any, wait for application. Other dry-
wall finishes include plywood, fiberboard, or wood in
various sizes and forms. Plaster was once quite popular
for interior walls. Plaster is a mixture (usually of lime,
sand, and water) applied in two or three coats to lath to
form a hard-wall surface. A plaster finish requires a base
on which plaster can be spread. Wood lath at one time
was the plaster base most commonly used, but today gyp-
sum-board lath is more popular. Gypsum lath may be
perforated to improve the bond and thus lengthen the
time the plaster can remain intact when exposed to fire.
Building codes in some cities require that gypsum lath be
perforated. Expanded-metal lath also may be used as a
plaster base. Expanded-metal lath consists of sheet metal
slit and expanded to form openings to hold the plaster.
Plaster is applied over the base to a minimum thickness
of % inch. Because wood-framing members may dry after
the house is completed, some shrinkage can be expected,
which, in turn, may cause plaster cracks to develop
around openings and in corners. Strips of lath embedded
in the plaster at these locations prevent cracks. Bathrooms
have unique moisture exposure problems and local code
approved cement board should be used around bath and
shower enclosures.

Stairways
The purpose of stairway dimension standards is to ensure
adequate headroom and uniformity in riser and tread size.

Interior stairways (Figure 6.5) should be no less than 44
inches wide. The width of a stairway may be reduced to
36 inches when permitted by local or state code in one-
and two-family dwellings. Stairs with closed risers should
have maximum risers of 8% inches and minimum treads
of 9 inches plus 1 inch nosing. Basement stairs are often
constructed with open risers. These stairs should have
maximum risers of 84 inches and minimum treads of 9
inches plus 1-inch nosing. The headroom in all parts of
the stair enclosure should be no less than 80 inches.
Dimensions of exterior stairways should be the same as
those of interior stairways, except that the headroom
requirement does not apply.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

CORNER
Post

Bolustor should be at least 26

Inches high and less than four

leches apart (|
BALUSTER imi

HAND RAIL

WALL +a

LANDING OR
PLATFORM

8%. MAXIMUM

!

Figure 6.5. Interior Stairway [4]

Staircases should have handrails that are between 114 and
2% inches wide, particularly if the staircases have more
than four steps. Handrails should be shaped so they can
be readily grasped for safety and placed so they are easily
accessible. Handrails should be 4¥% inches from the wall
and be 34 to 38 inches above the leading edge of the
stairway treads. Handrails should not end in any manner
or have projections that can snag clothing.

Windows

The six general classifications of windows (Figure 6.6) are
as follows [1]:

* Double-/ung sash windows that move up or down,
balanced by weights hung on chains, ropes, or springs
on each side;

° Casement sash windows that are hinged at the side and
can be hung so they will swing out or in;

¢ Awning windows that usually have two or more glass
panes that are hinged at the top and swing out
horizontally;

° Sliding windows that usually have two or more glass
panes that slide past one another on a horizontal track;

° Fixed windows that are generally for increased light
entry and decorative effect; and

° Skylight windows for increased room illumination and
decoration that can be built to open.

Chapter 6: Housing Structure 6-11



Page 488: a

Awning

Skylight (Decorative)

Sliding

Fixed (Picture)

Figure 6.6. Classifications of Windows [1]

Cripple Studs

Figure 6.7. Three Dimensional View of a Window [1]

6-12 Chapter 6: Housing Structure

“SECTION

The principal parts of a
window, shown in three-
dimensional view in
Figure 6.7 and face-on and
side view in Figure 6.8, are
the following:

HEAD

Drip cap—A separate
piece of wood projecting
over the top of the win-
dow; a component of the
window casing. The drip
cap protects against
moisture.

Window trough—The
cut or groove in which the
sash of the window slides
or rests. wack

Window sill—The shelf
on the bottom edge of a

SitL

SECTION

DRIP CAP

TOP RAIL

GLASS PANE
MUNTIN

MEETING RAIL
OUTER TRACK

window, either a project- MUNTIN
ing part of the window BLASS Rat
frame or the bottom of stoot BOTTOM RAIL

the wall recess that the APRON or

window fits into. The sill PLAUEER
contains the trough and
protects against moisture. Figure 6.8. Window Details [3]

Recent technological advancements—new materials,
coatings, design, and construction features—make it pos-
sible to choose windows that allow you to balance winter
heating and summer cooling needs without sacrificing
versatility or style. To ensure that windows, doors, or sky-
lights selected are appropriate for the region in which
they are to be installed, Energy Star Certification labels
include a climate region map.

Some window glass is made of tempered glass to resist
breakage. Some windows are made of laminated glass,
which resists breakage, but if broken produces glass
shards too small to cause injury [14]. The glazing, or
glass, can be a solid glass sheet (single glazed) or have two
layers of glass (double glazed) separated by a spacer. Air
trapped between the glass layers provides some insulation
value. Triple-glazed windows have three pieces of glass, or
two layers of glass with a low emissivity film suspended
between them. Triple-glazed windows have advantages
where extremes in weather and temperature are the norm.
They also can reduce sound transmission to a greater
degree than can single- or double-glazed windows.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 489: Doors

There are many styles of doors both for exterior and inte-
rior use. Exterior doors must, in addition to offering pri-
vacy, protect the interior of the structure from the
elements. Various parts of a door are the same as the cor-
responding parts of a window. A door’s function is best
determined by the material from which it is made, how it
looks, and how it operates. When doors are used for secu-
rity, they are typically made from heavy materials and
have durable, effective locks and hinges. A door that lets
in light or allows people to look out onto the yard, such
as a sliding glass door or a french door, will have multiple
panes (also called lights) or be made almost completely of
glass.

Houses have many exterior and interior door options.
Exterior doors are typically far sturdier than interior
doors and need to be weather tight and ensure security
for the home. Exterior doors are also more decorative
than most interior doors and may cost a considerable
amount. Typical exterior doors include front entry doors,
back doors, french doors, dutch doors, sliding glass doors,
patio doors, and garage doors.

French doors and sliding doors are examples of the two
primary ways doors open. French doors swing on hinges;
sliding doors glide along a track. Some doors, such as
dutch doors, have tops and bottoms that swing open
independently.

Most doors are made of wood or materials made to look
like wood. Fiberglass composite and steel doors often
have polymer or vinyl coatings embossed with wood
grain; some even have cellulose-based coatings that can be
stained like wood doors. Wood doors are made from
every kind of wood imaginable, hardwoods being the
most durable and elegant. Wood doors insulate better
than glass; composite and steel doors provide even more
insulation and durability, as well as better security than
does wood.

Garage Doors

Garage doors open in almost any configuration needed
for the design of the home. Installing most garage doors
is complex and dangerous enough that only a building
professional should attempt it. Garage doors often
include very strong springs that can come loose and
severely injure the unsuspecting installer. Garage door
springs are under extreme tension because of the heavy
loads they must lift, which makes them dangerous to
adjust. A garage door may suffer from any of several
problems. The most common problem is that the door

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

becomes difficult to lift and lower. This may be some-
thing that can be resolved with simple adjustments, or it
may be more serious. If the door is connected to an elec-
tric opener, the opener mechanism can be disconnected
from the door by pulling the release cord or lever. If the
door then works manually, the problem is with the elec-
tric opener. A door that seems unusually hard to lift may
have a problem with spring tension. Wood doors should
be properly painted or stained both outside and inside. If
only the outside of a garage door is finished, the door
may warp and moisture may cause the paint to peel.

Rules issued by the Consumer Product Safety
Commission on December 3, 1992, specify entrapment
protection requirements for garage doors [15].

The rules require that residential garage door openers
contain one of the following:

e An external entrapment protection device, such as an
electric eye that sees an object obstructing the door
without having actual contact with the object. A
door-edge sensor is a similar device. The door-edge
sensor acts much like the door-edge sensors on elevator
doors.

¢ A constant contact control button, which is a
wall-mounted button requiring a person to hold in the
control button continuously for the door to close
completely. If the button is released before the door
closes, the door reverses and opens to the highest
position.

¢ A sticker on all newly manufactured garage door
openers warning consumers of the potential entrapment
hazard. The sticker is to be placed near the
wall-mounted control button.

The variety of exterior door systems has increased signifi-
cantly over the past 5 to 10 years. Many combine several
different materials to make a realistic, if not actual wood,
door that provides both beauty and enhanced security.

Exterior House Doors

Exterior door frames are ordinarily of softwood plank,
with the side rabbitted to receive the door in the same
way as casement windows. At the foot is a sill, made of
hardwood or other material, such as aluminum, to with-
stand the wear of traffic and sloped down and out to shed
water. Doors often come equipped with door sweeps to
conserve energy.

The four primary categories of modern exterior doors are
steel, fiberglass, composites, and wood.

Chapter 6: Housing Structure 6-13



Page 490: Steel—The most common exterior door sold today is
steel. Humidity will not cause a steel door to warp or
twist. Steel doors often have synthetic wood-grain
embossed finishes that accept stain. Just about every steel
exterior door is filled with some type of foam. This foam
allows the doors to achieve R-values almost five times
that of an ordinary wood door. Metal is often used as a
veneer frame. In general, the horizontal members are
called rails and the vertical members are called stiles.
Every door has a top and bottom rail, and some may have
intermediate rails. There are always at least two stiles, one
on each side of the door.

Fiberglass—The second most frequently selected exterior
door is fiberglass. Fiberglass doors are similar to steel
doors, but tend to be much more resistant to denting.
(Steel doors can be dented quite easily.) Fiberglass doors
also are stainable and have rich, realistic wood graining.
Fiberglass doors are insulated with foam and have high
R-values.

Composite materials—The third most common exterior
door is made of composite materials. These doors often
are of two materials blended together. Their composite
fiber-reinforced core can be twice as strong as wood. This
composite core will not rot, warp, or twist when sub-
jected to high levels of humidity.

Wood—The last major category of doors is wood. Solid
wood doors range from inexpensive to true works of art.
Their downside is that they can warp and bow if not
sealed properly from humidity and will then fit poorly in
their frames.

Other types of wooden doors are described below.

¢ Batten doors are often found on older homes. They
are made of boards nailed together in various ways.
The simplest is two layers nailed to each other at right
angles, usually with each layer at 45° to the vertical.
Another type of batten door consists of vertical boards
nailed at right angles to several (two to four) cross
strips called ledgers, with diagonal bracing members
nailed between the ledgers. If vertical members
corresponding to ledgers are added at the sides, the
verticals are called frames. Batten doors are often
found in cellars and other places where appearance is
not a factor and economy is desired.

° Solid flush doors are perfectly flat, usually on both
sides, although occasionally they are made flush on
one side and are paneled on the other. Flush doors
sometimes are solid planking, but they are commonly

6-14 Chapter 6: Housing Structure

veneered and possess a core of small pieces of white
pine or other wood. These pieces are glued together
with staggered end joints. Along the sides, top, and
bottom are glued 34 inch edge strips of the same
wood, used to create a smooth surface that can be cut
or planed. The front and back faces are then covered
with a %-inch to Y%4-inch layer of veneer. Solid flush
doors may be used on both the interior and exterior.

* Hollow-core doors, like solid flush doors, are
perfectly flat; but, unlike solid doors, the core consists
mainly of a grid of crossed wooden slats or some other
type of grid construction. Faces are three-ply plywood
instead of one or two plies of veneer, and the surface
veneer may be any species of wood, usually hardwood.
The edges of the core are solid wood and are made
wide enough at the appropriate places to accommodate
locks and butts. Doors of this kind are considerably
lighter than solid flush doors. Hollow-core doors are
usually used as interior doors.

Many doors are paneled, with most panels consisting of
solid wood or plywood, either raised or flat, although
exterior doors frequently have one or more panels of
glass. One or more panels may be used, although some
have as many as nine panels. Paneled doors may be used
both on the interior or exterior.

The frame of a doorway is the portion to which the door
is hinged. It consists of two side jambs and a head jamb,
with an integral or attached stop against which the door
closes.

Roof Framing
Rafters

One of a series of structural roof members spanning from
an exterior beam or a ridge board. Rafters serve the same

purpose for the roof as joists do for floors, that is, provid-
ing support for sheathing and roofing material. They are

typically placed on 16-inch centers.

Collar Beam

Collar beams are ties between rafters on opposite sides of
the roof. If the attic is to be used for rooms, the collar
beam may double as the ceiling joist.

Purlin

A purlin is the horizontal member that forms the support
for the rafters at the intersection of the two slopes of a
gambrel roof.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 491: Ridge Board

A ridge board is a horizontal member that forms a lateral
tie to make rafters secure.

Hip

A hip is like a ridge, except that it slopes. It is the intersec-

tion of two adjacent, rather than two opposite, roof planes.

Roof Sheathing

The manner in which roof sheathing is applied depends
upon the type of roofing material. Roof boards may vary
from tongue-and-groove lumber to plywood panels.

Dormer

The term “dormer window” is applied to all windows in
the roof of a building, whatever their size or shape.

Roofs

Asphalt Shingle

The principal damage to asphalt shingle roofs is caused
by strong winds on shingles nailed close to the ridge line
of the roof. Usually the shingles affected by winds are
those in the four or five courses nearest the ridge and in
the area extending about 5 feet down from the edge or
rake of the roof.

EPDM

Ethylene propylene diene monomer (EPDM) is a single-
ply roofing system. EPDM allows extreme structural
movement without splitting or cracking and retains its
pliability in a wide range of temperatures.

Asphalt Built-up Roofs

Asphalt roofs may be unsurfaced (a coating of bitumen
being exposed directly to the weather) or surfaced (with
slag or gravel embedded in the bituminous coating).
Using surfacing material is desirable as a protection
against wind damage and the elements. This type of roof
should have enough pitch to drain water readily.

Coal Tar Pitch Built-up Roofs

This type of roof must be surfaced with slag or gravel. A
coal tar pitch built-up roof should always be used on a
deck pitched less than ¥ inch per foot; that is, where
water may collect and stand. This type of roof should be
inspected on completion, 6 months later, and then at
least once a year, preferably in the fall. When the top
coating of bitumen shows damage or has become badly
weathered, it should be renewed.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Slate Roofs

The most common problem with slate roofs is the
replacement of broken slates. Otherwise, slate roofs nor-
mally render long service with little or no repair.

Tile Roofs

Replacement of broken shingle tiles is the main mainte-
nance problem with tile roofs. This is one of the most
expensive roofing materials. It requires very little mainte-
nance and gives long service.

Copper Roofs

Usually made of 16-ounce copper sheeting and applied to
permanent structures, copper roofs require practically no
maintenance or repair when properly installed. Proper
installation allows for expansion and contraction with
changes in temperature.

Galvanized Iron Roofs

The principal maintenance for galvanized iron roofs
involves removing rust and keeping the roof well painted.
Leaks can be corrected by renailing, caulking, or replacing
all or part of the sheet or sheets in disrepair.

Wood Shingle Roofs

The most important factors of wood shingle roofs are
their high pitch and exposure, the character of wood, the
kind of nails used and the preservative treatment given
the shingles. At one time these roofs were treated with
creosote and coal tar preservatives. Because they are made
from a flammable material, insurance companies fre-
quently have higher rates for wood shingle roofs.

Roof Flashing

Valleys in roofs (such as gambrel roofs, which have two
pitches designed to provide more space on upper floors
and are steeper on their lower slope and flatter toward the
ridge) that are formed by the junction of two downward
slopes may be open or closed. In a closed valley, the
slates, tiles, or shingles of one side meet those of the
other, and the flashing below them may be comparatively
narrow. In an open valley, the flashing, which may be
made of zinc, copper, or aluminum, is laid in a continu-
ous strip, extending 12 to 18 inches on each side of the
valley, while the tiles or slates do not come within 4 to 6
inches of it. The ridges built up on a sloping roof where
it runs down against a vertical projection, like a chimney
or a skylight, should be weatherproofed with flashing.
Failure of roof flashing is usually due to exposed nails
that have come loose. The loose nails allow the flashing

Chapter 6: Housing Structure 6-15



Page 492: to lift, resulting in leakage. Flashings made of lead or
coated with lead should not be used.

The use of a thin, self-sticking rubber ice and water
shield under flashings and on the edge of roofs is now
common practice. The shield helps reduce leakage and
ice backup in cold climates, preventing serious damage
to this part of the home.

Gutters and Leaders

Gutters and leaders should be of noncombustible mate-
rials and should not be made of lead, lead-coated copper,
or any other formulation containing lead. They should
be securely fastened to the structure and spill into a
storm sewer, not a sanitary sewer, if the neighborhood
has one. When there is no storm sewer, a concrete or
stone block placed on the ground beneath the leader
prevents water from eroding the lawn. This stone block
is called a splash block. Gutters should be checked every
spring and fall and cleaned when necessary. Gutters must
be placed or installed to ensure that water drainage is
taken away from the foundation of the house. Soil
around the home should be graded in a manner that also
drains the water away from the foundation of the home.

Exterior Walls

and Trim

Exterior walls are enclo-
sure walls whose purpose
is not only to make the
building weather tight,
but to also allow the
building to dry out. In
most one- to three-story
buildings they also serve
as bearing walls. These
walls may be made of
many different materials

(Figure 6.9).

Brick is often used to
cover framed exterior
walls. In this situation,
the brick is only one
course thick and is called
a brick veneer. It sup-
ports nothing but itself
and is kept from top-
pling by ties connected
to the frame wall.

ROOF
SHEATHING OF
SHINGLE

tam

PLATE

Finestor

401sT oint

FInESTOR

Diagonar
SHEATHING

SUBFLOOR

SECTION JOISTS AT RIGHT ANGLES
TO EXTEMION WALL WITH CRAWL SPACE

Figure 6.9. Wall Framing [4]

6-16 Chapter 6: Housing Structure

In frame construction, the base material of the exterior
walls is called sheathing. The sheathing material may be
square-edge, shiplap, tongue-and-groove boards, or ply-
wood or oriented strand board (OSB). Sheathing, in
addition to serving as a base for the finished siding mate-
rial, stiffens the frame to resist sway caused by wind. It is
for this reason that sheathing is applied diagonally on
frame buildings. Its role is to brace the walls effectively
to keep them from racking.

Many types of sidings, shingles, and other exterior cover-
ings are applied over the sheathing. Vinyl siding; wood
siding; brick, cedar, and other wood shingles or shakes;
asphalt; concrete; clapboard; common siding (called
bevel siding); composition siding; cement shingles; fiber
cement (e.g., Hardiplank); and aluminum siding are
commonly used for exterior coverings. In older homes,
asbestos-cement siding shingles can still be found as an
exterior application or underneath various types of alu-
minum or vinyl siding.

Clapboard and common siding differ only in the length
of the pieces. Composition siding is made of felt, grit,
and asphalt, which are often shaped to look like brick.
Asbestos and cement shingles, which were used until the
early 1970s, are rigid and produce a siding that is fire-
resistant, but also a health hazard. Cedar wood shingles
and aluminum are manufactured with a backer board
that gives insulation and fire-resistant qualities. Vinyl
siding is manufactured from polyvinyl chloride (PVC),
a building material that has replaced metal as the prime
material for many industrial, commercial, and consumer
products. PVC has many years of performance as a con-
struction material, providing impact-resistance, rigidity,
and strength. The use of vinyl siding is not without con-
troversy, because PVC is known to cause cancer in
humans. Accidental fires in vinyl-sided buildings are
more dangerous because vinyl produces toxic vapors
when heated.

Putting It All Together
The next section shows a home being built by Habitat
for Humanity.

This small, one-family home represents all of the pro-
cesses that would also be used for a far more expensive
and elaborate dwelling. The homebuilding demonstrated
by the following pictures was by an industrial arts class
to educate and train a new generation of construction
specialists and homebuilders.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 493: A.

The foundation trench for a new home has horizontal
metal rods, also called reinforcement rods or rebar, to
increase the strength of the concrete. After the concrete
hardens, a perforated pipe 4 to 6 inches in diameter is
placed beside it to collect water and allow it to drain
away from the foundation. This pipe is the footing
drain, and the poured concrete beside it is the footer.
The footing drain is important in removing water from
the base of the home. It also serves the secondary
purpose of moisture control in the home and provides a
venting route for radon gas. The holes dug near the legs
of the workers will be filled with concrete and form the
footer that will hold up the porch of the home.

To assist in preventing capillary action from wicking
water from the foundation to the wooden structure,
a polyethylene sheet is placed over the footer before
pouring the concrete foundation, or building a
cinderblock foundation.

The concrete on top of the footer is leveled to establish
a surface for the foundation of the home. Once the
footer has hardened, the perforated drainage pipe will
be laid on the outside of the poured foundation wall.
The reinforcing rods were positioned in the trench
before pouring the concrete.

G

Concrete will be poured into this form on top of the
footer to create the foundation of the home. Again,
reinforcing rods are added to ensure that the concrete
has both lateral strength, as well as the strength to
support the home. Once the concrete has hardened

and becomes seasoned, the forms will be removed to
reveal the finished poured concrete foundation over

the perforated drainage pipe. Not shown is a newer
technique of using insulating polystyrene forms and ties
in a building foundation.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Chapter 6: Housing Structure 6-17



Page 494: Foundations are not always poured concrete, but are
often cinderblock or similar materials that are cemented
in place to form the load-bearing wall. The arrow

shows the concrete chute delivering concrete into the
form. Long poles are pushed into the freshly poured
concrete to remove air pockets that would weaken the
foundation.

Care must be taken to ensure that the forms are
appropriately supported before pouring the concrete.
Often tar, plastic, or other waterproof materials are
placed on the outside of the foundation to the ground
level to further divert moisture from the house to the
footing drains.

ES

Gravel fill is placed outside the finished poured concrete
foundation. This ensures that moisture does not stand
around the foundation for any time. The moisture is
routed to the footing drain for fast dispersal.

li

A termite shield is established on top of the concrete
wall (foundation) just below the sill of the home. The
sill is typically made of pressure- and insecticide-treated
wood to ensure stability and long life.

A cinderblock foundation will be used to support the
storage shed attached to the house. Note the potential
for inadvertent sabotage of the termite shield if a
shield is not installed on the top of the cinder block
foundation.

G.

OSB subfloor, the joist supporting the floor, and the
metal bridging that is used to keep the joist from
twisting can be seen from the crawl space under the
home.

If the material used for the flooring or external
sheathing of the home is made of plywood or a
composition that is not waterproof, the material must
be protected from rain to prevent deterioration and
germination of mold spores. Some glues or resins
release toxic vapors for years if deterioration is allowed
to begin.

6-18 Chapter 6: Housing Structure Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 495: HN | NB

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

H.

The flooring material of the first floor of the home is
OSB applied to the subfloor with both glue and wood
screws. Where possible, the screws should extend into
the subfloor and the joist below the subfloor to prevent
squeaking.

Te

The interior wall framing is composed of studs
traditionally referred to as 2x4s. The horizontal member
at the top of the studs is called a girt or a ribbon. In
this case the builders have used two 2x4s, placing

one on top of the other. Because the outside walls
have used studs that are 2x6-inch boards, the girts

or ribbons on top of these are also double 2x6-inch
boards.

J.

The exterior wall framing is composed of studs that

are 2x6-inch boards. The horizontal member extending
from one exterior wall to the other is called a girder

and is a prime support for the second floor of the home.
The larger studs in the exterior wall are used both for
greater strength and to provide greater energy efficiency
for the home.

The lintels above the windows and doors distribute the
weight of the second floor and roof across the studs
that are located on each side of the openings in the
frame.

K.

The joists above the first floor are connected to the
central girder of the home by steel brackets. These
brackets provide a far more effective alternative than
does toenailing nails to hold the joists in place or to
notching the girder to hold them.

Chapter 6: Housing Structure 6-19



Page 496: 6-20

Chapter 6: Housing Structure

(by

The subroof or roof sheathing is applied from the
bottom up with temporary traction boards nailed to the
subroof to allow safe installation of the material.

The subroof is placed on the rafters up to the ridge
board of the roof. A waterproof material will be added to
the subroof before installing the final roofing material.

M.

An interior wall is installed to create second-floor
rooms.

The subroof has been installed.

The exterior wood of the home has been covered with
plastic sheathing or a housewrap to protect it from
moisture.

Flashing material, such as sheet metal, is installed at
critical locations to make sure that water does not enter
the home where the joints and angles of a roof meet:
where the dormer roof meets the roof and the walls of
the dormer meet the roof, where windows penetrate the
walls, where the vent stack penetrates the roof, where
the porch roof meets the front wall, skylights, and eaves
of the house.

0.

A safety scaffold is standing at the rear of the home,
and the final roofing material has been applied, in
addition to the exterior vinyl siding.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 497: References

1. US Inspect. Glossary of terms. Chantilly, VA: US Inspect;
no date. Available from URL: http://www.usinspect.com/
Glossary/glossary.asp.

2. Center for Disease Control. Housing construction
terminology. In: Basic housing inspection. Atlanta: US
Department of Health and Human Services; 1976.

3. Building Science Corporation. Read this before you
design, build, or renovate. Westford, MA: Building
Science Corporation; 2004.

4. Center for Disease Control. Basic housing inspection.
Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human Services;
1976.

5. Wagner JD. Drying out a wet basement. New York: This
Old House Ventures, Inc.; no date. Available from URL:
hetp://www.thisoldhouse.com/toh/knowhow/interiors/
article/0,16417,220912,00.html.

6. Friedman D. Inspecting foundations for structural defects.
Poughkeepsie, NY: Daniel Friedman; 2001. Available
from URL: http://www. inspect-ny.com/structure/
foundation.htm.

7. Association of Bay Area Governments. Foundations:
section 5. Oakland, CA: Association of Bay Area
Governments; 1998. Available from URL: http://www.
abag.ca.gov/bayarea/eqmaps/ fixit/ch5.

8. Crawford CB. CBD-148: foundation measurements.
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada: National Research Council;
1972. Available from URL: http://irc.nrc-cnrc.ge.calcbd/
cbd148e.html.

9. Hamilton JJ. CBD-184: foundations on swelling or
shrinking subsoils. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada: National
Research Council; 1977. Available from URL: http://irc.
nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/pubs/cbd/cbd184_e.html.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Lid

The front porch of the home is constructed of pressure-
treated, insect-resistant lumber. The use of such lumber
should be carefully evaluated with respect to what
chemicals have been used and the potential for human
exposure to the treated wood. Composite wood products
and plastic decking materials, collectively called Trex,
are available as an alternative to pressure-treated wood.
A proper hand railing and balusters will be installed.

10. US Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Basements and crawl spaces. Washington, DC: US
Department of Housing and Urban Development; 2000.
Available from URL: http://www.hud.gov/oftices/hsg/sth/
ref/sthp1-25.cfm.

11. Bateman BW. Light-gauge steel verses conventional wood
framing in residential construction. J Construction Educ
1997;2(2):99-108.

12. National Association of Home Builders Research Center.
Integrated steel/wood combination framing. Upper
Marlboro, MD: National Association of Home Builders;
no date. Available from URL: http://www.toolbase.org/
tertiary T-asp? Document D=4249&CategoryID=1142.

13. Steel Wood Studs. Why use steel wood studs? Reno, NV:
Steel Wood Studs; 2001.

14, Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation.
Understanding window terminology. Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada: Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation;
no date. Available from URL: http://www.cmhce-schl.ge.
ca/en/burema/gesein/abhose/abhose_061.cfm.

15. US Consumer Product Safety Commission. Safety
commission publishes Final Rules for automatic garage
door openers. Washington, DC: US Consumer Product
Safety Commission; 1992. Available from URL: http://
www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/prerel/prhtml93/93024.html.

Additional Sources of Information

Carmody J, Christian J, Labs K, editors. Builder’s foun-
dation handbook. Oak Ridge, TN: Oak Ridge National
Laboratory; 1991.

US Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Basements and crawl spaces. Washington, DC: US
Department of Housing and Urban Development; 2000.
Available from URL: http://www.hud.gov/offices/ hsg/

sfh/ref/sfhp 1-25.cfm.

Chapter 6: Housing Structure 6-21



Page 498: 6-22 Chapter 6: Housing Structure Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 499: Chapter 7: Environmental Barriers

“The physician can bury his mistakes, but the architect can
only advise his client to plant vines—so they should go as far
as possible from home to build their first buildings.”

Frank Lloyd Wright
New York Times, October 4, 1953

Introduction

Damaging moisture originates not only from outside a
home; it is created inside the home as well. Moisture is
produced by smoking; breathing; burning candles; wash-
ing and drying clothes; and using fireplaces, gas stoves,
furnaces, humidifiers, and air conditioning. Leaks from
plumbing, unvented bathrooms, dishwashers, sinks,
toilets, and garbage disposal units also create moisture
problems because they are not always found before water
damage or mold growth occurs. Figure 7.1 provides an
overview of the sources of moisture and types of air pol-
lutants that can enter a home.

Solving moisture problems is often expensive and time-
consuming. The first step is to do a moisture inventory to
eliminate problems in their order of severity. Problems
that are easiest and least expensive to resolve should be
addressed first. For example, many basement leaks have
been eliminated by making sure sump pumps and down-
spouts drain away from the house. On the other hand,
moisture seeping though basement or foundation walls
often is very expensive to repair. Eliminating such mois-

ture is seldom as simple as coating the interior wall, but
often requires expert consultation and excavating around
the perimeter of the house to install or clean clogged
footing drains. Sealing the outside of the basement walls
and coating the exterior foundation wall with tar or other
waterproofing compounds are often the only solutions to
eliminate moisture.

Moisture condensation occurs in both winter and sum-
mer. The following factors increase the probability of
condensation:

¢ Homes that are ineffectively insulated and are not
sealed against air infiltration in cold climates can result
in major moisture problems.

* Cool interior surfaces such as pipes, windows, tile
floors, and metal appliances; air conditioner coils with
poor outside drainage; masonry or concrete surfaces;
toilet tanks; and, in the winter, outside walls and
ceilings can result in moisture buildup from
condensation. If the temperature of an interior surface
is low enough to reach the dew point, moisture in the
air will condense on it and enhance the growth of
mold.

¢ Dehumidifiers used in regions where outside humidity
levels are normally 80% or higher have a moisture-
collecting tank that should be cleaned and disinfected
regularly to prevent the growth of mold and bacteria.

Figure 7.1. Sources of Moisture and Air Pollutants [1]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Chapter 7: Environmental Barriers 7-1



Page 500: It is best if dehumidifiers have a drain line
continuously discharging directly to the outside or into
a properly plumbed trap. This is also true in climates
where air conditioning units are used on a full-time or
seasonal basis. Their cooling pans provide an excellent
environment for the growth of allergenic or pathogenic
organisms.

¢ Moisture removed from clothing by clothes driers ends
up in the dryer vent if it is clogged by lint or
improperly configured. Moisture buildup in this vent
can result in mold growth and, if leakage occurs,
damage to the structure of the home. The vent over
the cooking area of the kitchen also should be checked
routinely for moisture or grease buildup.

Roof

The control of moisture in a home is of paramount
importance. It is no surprise that moisture control begins
with the design and integrity of the roof. Many types of
surfacing materials are used for roofs-stone, composition
asphalt, plastic, or metal, for example. Some have rela-
tively short lives and some, such as slate and tile, have
extraordinarily long lives. As in nearly all construction
materials, tradeoffs must be made in terms of cost, ther-
mal efficiency, and longevity. However, all roofs have two
things in common: the need to shed moisture and protect
the interior from the environment.

When evaluating the roof of a home, the first thing to
observe is the roofline against the sky to see if the roof’s
ridge board is straight and level. If the roofline is not
straight, it could mean that serious deterioration has
taken place in the structure of the home as a result of

improper construction, weight buildup, a deteriorated or

broken ridge beam, or rotting rafters. Whatever the cause,
the focus of an inspection must be to locate the extent of
the damage.

The next area to inspect is around the flashing on the roof.
Flashing is used around any structure that penetrates the
surface of a roof or where the roofline takes another direc-
tion. These areas include chimneys, gas vents, attic vents,
dormers, and raised and lowered roof surfaces. One of the
best ways to locate a leak around flashing is to go into the
attic and look carefully. Leaks often are discovered when it
rains; but if it is not raining, the underside of the roof can
be examined with the attic lights off for pinpoints of
daylight.

Roofing material should lay relatively flat and should not
wave or ripple. The roof should be checked for missing or
damaged shingles, areas where flashing should be installed,
elevation changes in roof surfaces, and evidence of decom-
posing or displaced surfaces around the edge of the roof
[1-3].

Insulation

A house must be able to breathe; therefore, air must not be
trapped inside, but must be allowed to exit the home with
its moisture. Moisture buildup in the home will lead to
both mold and bacteria growth. Figure 7.2 demonstrates
insulation blown into an attic, to a depth of approximately
12 inches (Figure 7.3). Figure 7.4 shows the area extend-
ing from a house under the roof, known as the soffit. The
soffit is perforated so that air can flow into the attic and
up through the ridge vents to ventilate the attic.

Roof Inspection

Is the roofline of the house straight?

Are there ripples or waves in the roof?

What is the condition of the gutters and downspouts?
What is the co

Does the flashing appear to be separated or damaged?

s there any apparent damage in the attic or can sunlight be s

Is there mold or discoloration on the rafters or roof sheath:

Is there evidence of corrosion between the gutter a

tion of the boards the gutters are attached to?

en through the roof?

>

d downspouts and any metal roofing or aluminum siding?

9. Do the downspouts route the water away from the base or foundation of the home?

10. Are the gutters covered or free of leaves? Are they sagging or separating from the fas

11. Does the gutter provide a mosquito-breeding area by holding water?

7-2 Chapter 7: Environmental Barriers Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 501: Figure 7.2. Blown Attic Insultation

If insulation is too thick or installed improperly, it restricts
proper air turnover in the attic and moisture or extreme
temperatures could result in mold or bacteria growth, as
well as delamination of the plywood and particleboards
and premature aging of the roof’s subsurface and shingles.

Care also must be taken in cold climates to ensure that
the insulation has a vapor barrier and that it is installed
face down. When insulation is placed in the walls of a
home, a thin plastic vapor barrier should be placed over
the insulation facing the inside of the home. The purpose
of this vapor barrier is to keep moisture produced inside
the house from compromising the insulation. If the bar-
rier is not installed, warm, moist air will move through
the drywall and into the insulated wall cavity. When the
air cools, moisture will condense on the fibers of the insu-
lation making it wet; and, if it is cellulose insulation, it
will absorb and hold the moisture. Wetness reduces the
effectiveness of the insulation and provides a favorable
environment for the growth of bacteria and mold [4,5].

Siding

Good siding should be attractive, durable, insect- and ver-
min-resistant, waterproof, and capable of holding a
weather-resistant coating. Fire-resistant siding and roofing
are important in many areas where wildfires are common
and are required by many local building codes.

All exterior surfaces will eventually deteriorate, regardless
of manufacturer warranties or claims. Leaks in the home
from the outside occur in many predictable locations. The
exterior siding or brick should be checked for cracks or
gaps in protective surfaces. Where plumbing, air vents,
electrical outlets, or communication lines extend through
an exterior wall, they should be carefully checked to

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Figure 7.3. Depth of Attic Insulation

Ceiling Joist

Outside Air
Properly Installed Insulation (!’i1)\)

Ceiling Joist
ee Dampness or

Mildew i

Outside Air
Improperly Installed Insulation (!in\)

Figure 7.4. Attic ventilation

ensure an airtight seal around those openings. The exte-
rior surface of the home has doors, windows, and other
openings. These openings should be caulked routinely,
and the drainage gutters along the top should be checked
to ensure that they drain properly.

Exterior surface materials include stucco, vinyl, asbestos

shingles, brick, metal (aluminum), fiber cement, exterior
plywood, hardwood, painted or coated wood, glass, and

tile, some of which are discussed in this chapter [6,7].

73

Chapter 7: Environmental Barriers



Page 502: Fiber Cement

Fiber cement siding is engineered composite-material
products that are extremely stable and durable. Fiber
cement siding is made from a combination of cellulose
fiber material, cement and silica sand, water, and other
additives. Fiber cement siding is fire resistant and useful
in high-moisture areas.

The fiber cement mixture is formed into siding or individ-
ual boards, then dried and cured using superheated steam
under pressure. The drying and curing process assures that
the fiber cement siding has very low moisture content,
which makes the product is stable—no warping or exces-
sive movement—and its surface good for painting.

Weight is a minor concern with fiber cement products:
they weigh about 1% times what comparably sized com-
posite wood products do. Other concerns relate to cutting
fiber cement: cutting produces a fine dust with micro-
scopic silica fibers, so personal protective equipment (res-
pirator and goggles) are necessary. In addition, special
tools are needed for cutting.

Brick

Brick homes may seem on the surface to be nearly main-
tenance free. This is true in some cases, but, like all sur-
faces, brick also degrades. Although this degradation takes
longer in brick than in other materials, repairing brick is
complex and quite expensive. There are two basic types of
brick homes. One is brick veneer, which is a thin brick set
to the outside of a wooden stud wall. The brick is not
actually the supporting wall. Brick veneer typically has the
same pattern of bricks around the doors and windows; a
true brick wall will have brick arches or heavy steel plates
above the doors and other openings of the building. Some
brick walls have wooden studs behind the brick to pro-
vide an area for insulation, plumbing, vents, and wiring.
It is important that weep holes and flashing be installed
in brick homes to control moisture.

Improperly constructed building footers can result in
major damage to the exterior brick surface of a home by
allowing moisture, insects, and vermin to enter. A crack,
such as the one in Figure 7.5, is an example of such a fail-
ure. This type of damage will require much more than
just a mortar patch. Buildings constructed of concrete
block also experience footer failure.
The damage is reason to not skimp
when installing and inspecting the
footing and reinforces the need for
appropriate concrete mix, rebar, and

Figure 7.5. Brick . .
footing drains.

Structural Defect

7-4

Chapter 7: Environmental Barriers

Stucco

Synthetic stucco (exterior insulation and finish system;
EIFS) is a multilayered exterior finish that has been used
in Europe since shortly after World War II, when contrac-
tors found it to be a good repair choice for buildings dam-
aged during the war. North American builders began using
EIFS in the 1980s, first in commercial buildings, then as
an exterior finish to wood frame houses.

EIFS has three layers:

¢ Inner layer—foam insulation board secured to the
exterior wall surface, often with adhesive;

¢ Middle layer—a polymer and cement base coat
applied to the top of the insulation, then reinforced
with glass fiber mesh; and

¢ Exterior layer—a textured finish coat.

EIFS layers bond to form a covering that does not breathe.
If moisture seeps in, it can become trapped behind the lay-
ers. With no place to go, constant exposure to moisture
can lead to rot in wood and other vulnerable materials
within the home. Ripples in the stucco could be a sign of
a problem. On the surface it may look like nothing is
wrong, but beneath the surface, the stucco may have
cracked from settling of the house. With a properly
installed moisture barrier, no moisture should be able to
seep behind the EIFS, including moisture originating
inside the home. Drains in the foundation can be designed
to enable moisture that does seep in to escape.

Other signs of problems are mold or mildew on the inte-
rior or exterior of the home, swollen wood around door
and window frames, blistered or peeling paint; and
cracked EIFS or cracked sealant.

Vinyl

Standard vinyl siding is made from thin, flexible sheets of
plastic about 2 mm thick, precolored and bent into shape
during manufacturing. The sheets interlock as they are
placed above one another. Because temperature and sun-
light cause vinyl to expand and contract, it fits into deep
channels at the corners and around windows and doors.
The channels are deep enough that as the siding contracts,
it remains within the channel.

Siding composed of either vinyl or aluminum will expand
and contract in response to temperature change. This
requires careful attention to the manufacturer's specifica-
tions during application. Cutting the siding too short
causes exposed surfaces when the siding contracts, result-
ing in moisture damage and eventual leakage. Even small
cracks exposing the undersurface can create major damage.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 503: Vinyl has some environmental and health concerns, as do
most exterior treatments. Vinyl chloride monomer, of
which polyvinyl chloride siding is made, is a strong car-

cinogen and, when heated, releases toxic gases and vapors.

Under normal conditions, significant exposures to vinyl
chloride monomer are unlikely.

Asbestos

Older homes were often sided with composites contain-
ing asbestos. This type of siding was very popular in the
early 1940s. It was heavily used through the 1950s and
decreasingly used up until the early 1960s. The siding is
typically white, although it may be painted. It is often
about %-inch thick and very brittle and was sold in sec-
tions of about 12x18 inches. The composite is quite
heavy and very slatelike in difficulty of application. As it
ages, it becomes even more brittle, and the surface erodes
and becomes powdery. This siding, when removed, must
be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal
laws regulating the disposal of asbestos materials. The
workers and the site must be carefully managed and pro-
tected from contamination. The composite had several
virtues as siding. It was quite resistant to fire, was not
attractive to insects or vermin, provided very good insula-
tion, and did not grow mold readily. Because of its very
brittle nature, it could be damaged by children playing
and, as a result, often was covered later with aluminum

siding.

Metal

If metal siding is used, the mounting fasteners (nails or
screws) must be compatible with the metal composition
of the siding, or the siding or fasteners will corrode. This
corrosion is due to galvanic response.

Galvanic response (corrosion) can produce devastating
results that often are only noticed when it is too late. It
should always be considered in inspections and is pre-
ventable in nearly all cases.

When two dissimilar metals, such as aluminum and steel,
are coupled and subjected to a corrosive environment
(such as air, water, salt spray, or cleaning solutions), the
more active metal (aluminum) becomes an anode and
corrodes through exfoliation or pitting. This can happen
with plumbing, roofing, siding, gutters, metal venting,
and heating and air conditioning systems.

When two metals are electrically connected to each other
in a conductive environment, electrons flow from the
more active metal to the less active because of the differ-
ence in the electrical potential, the so-called “driving
force.” When the most active metal (anode) supplies cur-

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

r . oC
Metal Corrosion Prevention
Use like metals when possible
Use metals with similar electronegativity levels
Use dielectric unions for plumbing
Use anodes that are inexpensive to replace

Remember: Use metals with less suscep lity to protect

metals that are more susceptible to corrosion.

rent, it will gradually dissolve into ions in the electrolyte
and, at the same time, produce electrons, which the least
active (cathode) will receive through the metallic connec-
tion with the anode. The result is that the cathode will be
negatively polarized and hence be protected against
corrosion.

Thus, less noble metals are more susceptible to corrosion.
An example of protecting an appliance such as an iron-
bodied water heater would be to ensure that piping con-
nections are of similar material when possible and follow
the manufacturer’s good practice and instructions on
using dielectric (not conductors of electricity) unions [8].

Figure 7.6 shows examples of electrochemical kinetics in
pipes that were connected to dissimilar metals.

Figure 7.6. Corrosion in Piping Resulting From Galvanic Response

References

1. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Cool roofing
materials database. Berkeley, CA: Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, Environmental Energy Technologies
Division; 2000. Available from URL: http://eetd.Ibl.gov/

coolroof/.

2. California Energy Commission. Roofing. Sacramento:
California Energy Commission; no date. Available from
URL: http://www.consumerenergycenter.org/
homeandwork/homes/construction/roofing. html,

Chapter 7: Environmental Barriers 7-5



Page 504: 7-6

Cazayoux EJ, Bilello RA. Roof materials. Baton Rouge,
LA: Louisiana State University; no date. Available from
URL: http://www.leeric.lsu.edu/bgbb/7/ecep/carpntry/i/i.

hem.

Department of Energy. Insulation fact sheet. Washington,
DC: Department of Energy; 2002. Available from URL:
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/roofs+walls/insulation/ins_01.htm.

The Old House Web. Insulation: stories and more from the
Old House Web. Gardiner, ME: The Old House Web; no
date. Available from URL: http://www.oldhouseweb.com/
stories/HowTo/HVAC_and_Insulation/Insulation/.

The Old House Web. Siding: stories and more from the
Old House Web. Gardiner, ME: The Old House Web; no
date. Available from URL: http://www.oldhouseweb.com/

stories/How-To/Siding/.

Vandervort D. House siding and architectural details.
Glendale, CA: Hometips.com; no date. Available from
URL: http://www.hometips.com/home_improvement/

siding. html.

University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point. Corrosion, lead,
copper: in-home water supplies—are you at risk? Stevens
Point, WI: University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point; no date.
Available from URL: https://www.uwsp.edu/cnt/etf/corros.
htm.

Chapter 7: Environmental Barriers

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 505: Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues

“We never know the worth of water till the well is dry.”

Thomas Fuller
Gnomologia, 1732

Introduction

One of the primary differences between rural and urban
housing is that much infrastructure that is often taken for
granted by the urban resident does not exist in the rural
environment. Examples range from fire and police protec-
tion to drinking water and sewage disposal. This chapter
is intended to provide basic knowledge about the sources
of drinking water typically used for homes in the rural
environment. It is estimated that at least 15% of the pop-
ulation of the United States is not served by approved
public water systems. Instead, they use individual wells
and very small drinking water systems not covered by the
Safe Water Drinking Act (SDWA); these wells and sys-
tems are often untested and contaminated [1]. Many of
these wells are dug rather than drilled. Such shallow
sources frequently are contaminated with both chemicals
and bacteria. Figure 8.1 shows the change in water supply
source in the United States from 1970 to 1990.
According to the 2003 American Housing Survey, of the
105,843,000 homes in the United States, water is pro-
vided to 92,324,000 (87.2%) by a public or private busi-
ness; 13,097,000 (12.4%) have a well (11,276,000
drilled, 919,000 dug, and 902,000 not reported) [3].

Water Sources

The primary sources of drinking water are groundwater
and surface water. In addition, precipitation (rain and
snow) can be collected and contained. The initial quality

of the water depends on the source. Surface water (lakes,
reservoirs, streams, and rivers), the drinking water source
for approximately 50% of our population, is generally of
poor quality and requires extensive treatment.
Groundwater, the source for the other approximately 50%
of our population, is of better quality. However, it still
may be contaminated by agricultural runoff or surface
and subsurface disposal of liquid waste, including leachate
from solid waste landfills. Other sources, such as spring
water and rain water, are of varying levels of quality, but
each can be developed and treated to render it potable.

Most water systems consist of a water source (such as a
well, spring, or lake), some type of tank for storage, and a
system of pipes for distribution. Means to treat the water
to remove harmful bacteria or chemicals may also be
required. The system can be as simple as a well, a pump,
and a pressure tank to serve a single home. It may be a
complex system, with elaborate treatment processes, mul-
tiple storage tanks, and a large distribution system serving
thousands of homes. Regardless of system size, the basic
principles to assure the safety and potability of water are
common to all systems. Large-scale water supply systems
tend to rely on surface water resources, and smaller water
systems tend to use groundwater.

Groundwater is pumped from wells drilled into aquifers.
Aquifers are geologic formations where water pools, often
deep in the ground. Some aquifers are actually higher
than the surrounding ground surface, which can result in
flowing springs or artesian wells. Artesian wells are often
drilled; once the aquifer is penetrated, the water flows
onto the surface of the ground because of the hydrologic
pressure from the aquifer.

Water Supply by Decennial Census

90 j
2 80 Tl
= 70 fl
Ss 60 fi
2 2 507)
ae 407)
s 30 fl
a!
a |
0
1970 1980
Year

Figure 8.1. U.S. Water Supply by Source [2]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

@ Public System or Private
Company
@ Individual Well

O Individual Drilled Well

D Individual Dug Well

@ Other

1990

Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues 8-1



Page 506: SDWA defines a public water system as one that provides
piped water to at least 25 persons or 15 service connec-
tions for at least 60 days per year. Such systems may be
owned by homeowner associations, investor-owned water
companies, local governments, and others. Water not
from a public water supply, and which serves one or only
a few homes, is called a private supply. Private water sup-
plies are, for the most part, unregulated. Community
water systems are public systems that serve people year-
round in their homes. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) also regulates other kinds of
public water systems-such as those at schools, factories,
campgrounds, or restaurants-that have their own water

supply.

The quantity of water in an aquifer and the water pro-
duced by a well depend on the nature of the rock, sand,
or soil in the aquifer where the well withdraws water.
Drinking water wells may be shallow (50 feet or less) or
deep (more than 1,000 feet).

On average, our society uses almost 100 gallons of drink-
ing water per person per day. Traditionally, water use rates
are described in units of gallons per capita per day (gal-
lons used by one person in 1 day). Of the drinking water
supplied by public water systems, only a small portion is
actually used for drinking. Residential water consumers
use most drinking water for other purposes, such as toilet
flushing, bathing, cooking, cleaning, and lawn watering.

The amount of water we use in our homes varies during
the day:

° Lowest rate of use—11:30 pm to 5:00 am,

° Sharp rise/high use—5:00 am to noon (peak hourly
use from 7:00 am to 8:00 am),

* Moderate use—noon to 5:00 pm (lull around 3:00
pm), and

° Increasing evening use—5:00 pm to 11:00 pm
(second minor peak, 6:00 pm to 8:00 pm).

Pollution Source
Septic tank

Livestock yard silos
Septic leach fields

Source Location

The location of any source of water under consideration
as a potable supply, whether individual or community,
should be carefully evaluated for potential sources of con-
tamination. As a general practice, the maximum distance
that economics, land ownership, geology, and topography
will allow should separate a water source from potential
contamination sources. Table 8.1 details some of the
sources of contamination and gives minimum distances
recommended by EPA to separate pollution sources from
the water source.

Water withdrawn directly from rivers, lakes, or reservoirs
cannot be assumed to be clean enough for human con-
sumption unless it receives treatment. Water pumped
from underground aquifers will require some level of
treatment. Believing surface water or soil-filtered water
has purified itself is dangerous and unjustified. Clear
water is not necessarily safe water. To assess the level of
treatment a water source requires, follow these steps:

¢ Determine the quality needed for the intended
purpose (drinking water quality needs to be evaluated
under the SDWA).

° For wells and springs, test the water for bacteriologic
quality. This should be done with several samples
taken over a period of time to establish a history on
the source. With few exceptions, surface water and
groundwater sources are always presumed to be
bacteriologically unsafe and, as a minimum, must be
disinfected.

¢ Analyze for chemical quality, including both legal
(primary drinking water) standards and aesthetic
(secondary) standards.

¢ Determine the economical and technical restraints
(e.g., cost of equipment, operation and maintenance
costs, cost of alternative sources, availability of power).

¢ Treat if necessary and feasible.

Minimum Surface Distance From Well
50 feet
50 feet

Petroleum tanks
Liquid-tight manure storage
Pesticide and fertilizer storage and handling

Manure stacks

100 feet

250 feet

Table 8.1. Recommended Minimum Distance Between Well and Pollution Sources (Horizontal Distance) [1]

8-2 Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 507: Type of Well Diameter

Dug

Depth, in Feet
0-50 typically
less than 25

Bored 0-100

0-50 1.25 to 2

inches
4 to 24 inches

Driven

Drilled (rotary type) | 0-1,000

Suitable Geologic Formations

3 to 20 feet Suitable in clay, silt, sand, gravel, and soft fractured limestone

2 to 30 inches | Clay, silt, sand, gravel, boulders less than well diameter, soft
sandstone, and fractured limestone
Clay, sand, silt, fine gravel, and thin layers of sandstone

Same as above with percussion type drilling

Table 8.2. Types of Wells for Accessing Groundwater, Well Depths, and Diameters

Well Construction

Many smaller communities obtain drinking water solely
from underground aquifers. In addition, according to the
last census with data on water supply systems, 15% of
people in the United States are on individual water sup-
ply systems. In some sections of the country, there may
be a choice of individual water supply sources that will
supply water throughout the year. Some areas of the
country may be limited to one source. The various
sources of water include drilled wells, driven wells, jetted
wells, dug wells, bored wells, springs, and cisterns. Table
8.2 provides a more detailed description of some of these
wells.

Regardless of the choice for a water supply source, special
safety precautions must be taken to assure the potability
of the water. Drainage should be away from a well. The
casings of the well should be sealed with grout or some
other mastic material to ensure that surface water does
not seep along the well casing to the water source. In
Figure 8.2, the concrete grout has been reinforced with
steel and a drain away from the casing has been provided
to assist in protecting this water source. Additionally,
research suggests that a minimum of 10 feet of soil is
essential to filter unwanted biologic organisms from the
water source.

However, if the area of well construction has any sources
of chemical contamination nearby, the local public health
authority should be contacted. In areas with karst topog-
raphy (areas characterized by a limestone landscape with
caves, fissures, and underground streams), wells of any
type are a health risk because of the long distances that
both chemical and biologic contaminants can travel.

When determining where a water well is to be located,
several factors should be considered:

° the groundwater aquifer to be developed,

¢ depth of the water-bearing formations,

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

* the type of rock formations that will be encountered,
* freedom from flooding, and

* relation to existing or potential sources of
contamination.

The overriding concern is to protect any kind of well
from pollution, primarily bacterial contamination.
Groundwater found in sand, clay, and gravel formations
is more likely to be safer than groundwater extracted
from limestone and other fractured rock formations.
Whatever the strata, wells should be protected from

* surface water entering directly into the top of the well,

* groundwater entering below ground level without
filtering through at least10 feet of earth, and

* surface water entering the space between the well
casing and surrounding soil.

Also, a well should be located in such a way that it is
accessible for maintenance, inspection, and pump or pipe
replacement when necessary. Driven wells (Figure 8.2) are
typically installed in sand or soil and do not penetrate
base rock. They are, as a result, hammered into the

DRIVEN WELL cal
s | | Basement
ee
Tank m i
i } |

_ Pressure Switch:

= eae

Figure 8.2. Cross Section of a Driven Well

Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues 8-3



Page 508: ground and are quite shallow, resulting in frequent con-
tamination by both chemical and bacterial sources.

Sanitary Design and Construction

Whenever a water-bearing formation is penetrated (as in
well construction), a direct route of possible water con-
tamination exists unless satisfactory precautions are taken.
Wells should be provided with casing or pipe to an ade-
quate depth to prevent caving and to permit sealing of
the earth formation to the casing with watertight cement
grout or bentonite clay, from a point just below the sur-
face to as deep as necessary to prevent entry of contami-
nated water.

Once construction of the well is completed, the top of
the well casing should be covered with a sanitary seal, an
approved well cap, or a pump mounting that completely
covers the well opening (Figure 8.3). If pumping at the
design rate causes drawdown in the well, a vent through a
tapped opening should be provided. The upper end of
the vent pipe should be turned downward and suitably
screened to prevent the entry of insects and foreign
matter.

Screened vent pipe;
Finch minimum diameter

Top steel plate
of well seal

Rubber gasket sandwiched
between two steel plates

Figure 8.3. Well Seal

Pump Selection

A variety of pump types and sizes exist to meet the needs
of individual or community water systems. Some of the
factors to be considered in selecting a pump for a specific
application are well depth, system design pressure,
demand rate in gallons per minute, availability of power,
and economics.

Dug and Drilled Wells

Dug wells (Figures 8.4 and 8.5) were one of the most
common types of wells for individual water supply in the
United States before the 1950s. They were often con-
structed with one person digging the hole with a shovel

8-4 Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues

¢LOSED TOF PUM
Suing Bow Note:
“™ aaa
a)
Feme wand and bove
imu loe ane bee,
ieoed oy fs ees hele to be olaced
Karle ceoretton elon bert dood te
onde on ooblaere
Cvlnde: To Be Poca onions
Below Pow a! Mammen
Brewdeny
= Feondnc in Ongivol
Cable din Vroom 4% a oa a ad

LSS Le

Nowe a
Enbad m sows ane Grd Cara Exgoroye and vemare
Semp duitert ZAR] tot Kes thew 10 ft
swangh ond site 10 SS bees cebing
Se gt SS ined into
) Grovisey il eetend
i _ 2 rdicine’ depth
below tha pom to

t
ij
i

Figure 8.4. Converted Dug Well [1]

and another pulling the dirt from the hole with a rope,
pulley, and bucket. Of course, this required a hole of
rather large circumference, with the size increasing the
potential for leakage from the surface. The dug well also
was traditionally quite shallow, often less than 25 feet,
which often resulted in the water source being contami-
nated by surface water as it ran through cracks and crev-
ices in the ground to the aquifer. Dug wells provide
potable water only if they are properly located and the
water source is free of biologic and chemical contamina-
tion. The general rule is, the deeper the well, the more
likely the aquifer is to be free of contaminants, as long as
surface water does not leak into the well without suffi-
cient soil filtration.

Two basic processes are used to remediate dug wells. One
is to dig around the well to a depth of 10 feet and install
a solid slab with a hole in it to accommodate a well cas-
ing and an appropriate seal (Figures 8.4 and 8.5). The
dirt is then backfilled over the slab to the surface, and the
casing is equipped with a vent and second seal, similar to
a drilled well, as shown in Figure 8.6. This results in a
considerable reduction in the area of the casing that needs

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 509: to be protected. Experience has shown that the disturbed
dirt used for backfilling over the buried slab will continue
to release bacteria into the well for a short time after
modification. Most experts in well modification suggest
installing a chlorination system on all dug wells to disin-
fect the water because of their shallow depth and possible
biologic impurity during changing drainage and weather
conditions above ground. Figure 8.7 shows a dug well
near the front porch of a house and within 5 feet of a
drainage ditch and 6 feet of a rural road. This well is
likely to be contaminated with the pesticide used to ter-
mite-proof the home and from whatever runs off the
nearby road and drainage ditch. The well shown is about
15 feet deep. The brick structure around the well holds
the centrifugal pump and a heater to keep the water from
freezing. Although dangerous to drink from, this well is
typical of dug wells used in rural areas of the United
States for drinking water.

Note:
Pump screen to be
placed below point
of maximum draw-down,

WALT

See ER ENG SS

REAR NA ATS

SESE

Figure 8.5. Recapped and Sealed Dug Well [1]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Samples should not be taken from such wells because
they instill a false sense of security if they are negative for
both chemicals and biologic organisms. The quality of
the water in such wells can change in just a few hours
through infiltration of drainage water. Figure 8.8 shows
the septic tank discharge in the drainage ditch 5 feet
upstream of the dug well in Figure 8.7. This potential
combination of drinking water and waste disposal pres-
ents an extreme risk to the people serviced by the dug
well. Sampling is not the answer; the water source should
be changed under the supervision of qualified environ-
mental health professionals.

Well Casing
Pitless Adapter

Distribution Line
Bentonite Grout

Well Screen
Z| Gravel Pack

Figure 8.7. Typical Dug Well

Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues 8-5



Page 510: Figure 8.9 shows a drilled well. On the left side of the
picture is the corner of the porch of the home. The well
appears not to have a sanitary well seal and is likely open
to the air and will accept contaminants into the casing.
Because the well is so close to the house, the casing is
open, and the land slopes toward the well, it is a major
candidate for contamination and not a safe water source.

Springs

Another source of water for individual water supply is
natural springs. A spring is groundwater that reaches the
surface because of the natural contours of the land.

Springs are common in rolling hillside and mountain
areas. Some provide an ample supply of water, but most
provide water only seasonally. Without proper precau-
tions, the water may be biologically or chemically con-
taminated and not considered potable.

Figure 8.9. Drilled Well

8-6 Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues

To obtain satisfactory (potable) water from a spring, it is
necessary to

° find the source,
° properly develop the spring,

¢ eliminate surface water outcroppings above the spring
to its source,

* prevent animals from accessing the spring area, and
* provide continuous chlorination.

Figure 8.10 illustrates a properly developed spring. Note
that the line supplying the water is well underground, the
spring box is watertight, and surface water runoff is
diverted away from the area. Also be aware that the water
quality of a spring can change rapidly.

Cisterns

A cistern is a watertight, traditionally underground reser-
voir that is filled with rainwater draining from the roof of
a building. Cisterns will not provide an ample supply of
water for any extended period of time, unless the amount
of water used is severely restricted. Because the water is
coming off the roof, a pipe is generally installed to allow
redirection of the first few minutes of rainwater until the
water flows clear. Disinfection is, nevertheless, of utmost
importance. Diverting the first flow of water does not
assure safe, non-polluted water because chemicals and
biologic waste from birds and other animals can migrate
from catchment surfaces and from windblown sources. In
addition, rainwater has a low pH, which can corrode
plumbing pipes and fixtures if not treated.

Surface Water Diversion Ditch Watertight Cover

Overflow

Cutoff Wall

Figure 8.10. Spring Box [5]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 511: Disinfection of Water Supplies

Water supplies can be disinfected by a variety of methods
including chlorination, ozonation, ultraviolet radiation,
heat, and iodination. The advantages and disadvantages
of each method are noted in Table 8.3.

The understanding of certain terms (blue box, next page)
is necessary in talking about chlorination.

Table 8.4 is a chlorination guide for specific water
conditions.

Chlorine is the most commonly used water disinfectant.
It is available in liquid, powder, gas, and tablet form.
Chlorine gas is often used for municipal water disinfec-
tion, but can be hazardous if mishandled. Recommended
liquid, powder, and tablet forms of chlorine include the
following:

¢ Liquid—Chlorine laundry bleach (about 5%
chlorine). Swimming pool disinfectant or concentrated
chlorine bleach (12%-17% chlorine).

Disinfection Method
Boiling

Advantages
Readily accessible
Well suited for emergencies

water
Chlorine Provides residual treatment
Residual easy to test and measure
Readily available; reasonable cost
Low electrical requirement

Can treat large volumes of water
Ultraviolet light Does not change taste of water
Leaves no discernable odor

Kills bacteria almost immediately
Compact and easy to use

Iodine Does not require electricity
Requires little maintenance
Provides residual treatment

Residual easy to measure

Does not change taste of water
Leaves no discernable odor

Table 8.3. Disinfection Methods

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Removes volatile organic compounds from

Effective even on Giardia and Cryptosporidium

Useful for multiple water problems

¢ Powder—Chlorinated lime (25% chlorine), dairy
sanitizer (30% chlorine), and high-test calcium
hypochlorite (65%-75% chlorine).

Tablets—High-test calcium hypochlorite (65%-75%
chlorine).

¢ Gas—Gas chlorine is an economical and convenient
way to use large amounts of chlorine. It is stored in
steel cylinders ranging in size from 100 to 2,000
pounds. The packager fills these cylinders with liquid
chlorine to approximately 85% of their total volume;
the remaining 15% is occupied by chlorine gas. These
ratios are required to prevent tank rupture at high
temperatures. It is important that direct sunlight never
reaches gas cylinders. It is also important that the user
of chlorine knows the maximum withdrawal rate of
gas per day per cylinder. For example, the maximum
withdrawal rate from a 150-pound cylinder is
approximately 40 pounds per day at room temperature
discharging to atmospheric pressure.

Disadvantages

Requires a great deal of heat
Takes time to boil and cool
Water tastes stale

Typically limited capacity

Requires contact time of 30 minutes
Turbidity reduces effectiveness

Gives water a chlorine taste

May form disinfection by-products
Does not kill Giardia or Cryptosporidium
Requires careful handling and storage
High electrical requirement

Provides no residual treatment
Requires pretreatment if turbid
Requires new lamp annually

Health side effects undetermined
Affected by water temperature

Gives water an iodine taste

Is a more powerful disinfectant than chlorine | Ozone gas is unstable and must be generated at

point of use

Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues 8-7



Page 512: Chlorination Treatment for Typical Dosage Rates

Algae 3 to 5 ppm
Bacteria 3 to 5 ppm
Biologic oxygen demand reduction 10 parts per million

Color (removal) Dosage depends on type and extent of color removal desired; may vary
from 1 to 500 ppm dosage rate

Manganese precipitation 1 to 3 times manganese content

Odor 1 to 3 ppm

Taste 1 to 3 ppm

ppm: parts per million

Table 8.4. Chlorination Guide for Specific Water Conditions

Definitions of Terms Related to Chlorination

Breakpoint chlorination—A process sometimes used to ensure the presence of free chlorine in public water supplies by add-
ing enough chlorine to the water to satisfy the chlorine demand and to react with all dissolved ammonia that might be pres-
ent. The concentrations of chlorine needed to treat a variety of water conditions are listed in Table 8.4.

Chlorine concentration—The concentration (amount) of chlorine in a volume of water is measured in parts per million
(ppm). In 1 million gallons of water, a chlorine concentration of 1 ppm would require 8.34 pounds of 100% chlorine.
Contact time—The time, after chlorine addition and before use, given for disinfection to occur. For groundwater systems,
contact time is minimal. However, in surface water systems, a contact time of 20 to 30 minutes is common.
Dosage—The total amount of chlorine added to water. Given in parts per million (ppm) or milligrams per liter (mg/L).

Demand—Chlorine solution used by reacting with particles of organic matter such as slimes or other chemicals and miner-
als that may be present. The difference between the amount of chlorine applied to water and total available chlorine remain-
ing at the end of a specified contact period.

Parts per million—A weight-to-weight comparison; 1 ppm equals 1 pound per million pounds. Because water weighs 8.34
pounds per gallon, it takes 8.34 pounds of any substance per million gallons to equal 1 ppm. In water chemistry, 1 ppm
equals 1 mg/L.

Residual—The amount of chlorine left after the demand is met; available (free) chlorine. This portion provides a ready re-
serve for bactericidal action. Both combined and free chlorine make up chlorine residual and are involved in disinfection.
Total available chlorine = free chlorine + combined chlorine.

8-8 Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 513: Chlorine Carrier Solutions

On small systems or individual wells, a high-chlorine car-
rier solution is mixed in a tank in the pump house and
pumped by the chlorinator into the system. Table 8.5
shows how to make a 200-ppm carrier solution. By using
200 ppm, only small quantities of this carrier have to be
added. Depending on the system, other stock solutions
may be needed to better use existing chemical feed
equipment.

Amount of Chlorine per
100 Gallons of Water

3 pints

Carrier Solution
5% chlorine bleach

12%-17% chlorine solution
25%-30% chlorine powder

1 pint
2/3 pound

65%-75% chlorine powder 1/4 pound

Table 8.5. Preparing a 200-ppm Chlorine Solution

Routine Water Chlorination (Simple)

Most chlorinated public water supplies use routine water
chlorination. Enough chlorine is added to the water to
meet the chlorine demand, plus enough extra to supply
0.2 to 0.5 ppm of free chlorine when checked after 20
minutes.

Simple chlorination may not be enough to kill certain
viruses. Chlorine as a disinfectant increases in
effectiveness as the chlorine residual is increased and as
the contact time is increased.

Chlorine solutions should be mixed and chlorinators
adjusted according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Chlorine solutions deteriorate gradually when standing.
Fresh solutions must be prepared as necessary to maintain
the required chlorine residual. Chlorine residual should
be tested at least once a week to assure effective
equipment operation and solution strengths.

A dated record should be kept of solution preparation,
type, proportion of chlorine used, and residual-test
results. Sensing devices are available that will automati-
cally shut off the pump and activate a warning bell or
light when the chlorinator needs servicing.

Well Water Shock Chlorination

Shock chlorination is used to control iron and sulfate-
reducing bacteria and to eliminate fecal coliform bacteria
in a water system. To be effective, shock chlorination
must disinfect the following: the entire well depth, the
formation around the bottom of the well, the pressure
system, water treatment equipment, and the distribution

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

system. To accomplish this, a large volume of super-chlo-
rinated water is siphoned down the well to displace the
water in the well and some of the water in the formation
around the well. Check specifications on the water treat-
ment equipment to ensure appropriate protection of the
equipment.

With shock chlorination, the entire system-from the
water-bearing formation through the well-bore and the
distribution system-is exposed to water that has a concentration
of chlorine strong enough to kill iron and sulfate-reducing
bacteria. The shock chlorination process is complex and
tedious. Exact procedures and concentrations of chlorine
for effective shock treatment are available [6,7].

Backflow, Back-siphonage, and Other Water
Quality Problems

In addition to contamination at its source, water can
become contaminated with biologic materials and toxic
construction or unsuitable joint materials as it flows
through the water distribution system in the home. Water
flowing backwards (backflow) in the pipes sucks materials
back (back-siphonage) into the water distribution system,
creating equally hazardous conditions. Other water qual-
ity problems relate to hardness, dissolved iron and iron
bacteria, acidity, turbidity, color, odor, and taste.

Backflow

Backflow is any unwanted flow of nonpotable water into
a potable water system. The direction of flow is the
reverse of that intended for the system. Backflow may be
caused by numerous factors and conditions. For example,
the reverse pressure gradient may be a result of either a
loss of pressure in the supply main (back-siphonage) or
the flow from a pressurized system through an unpro-
tected cross-connection (back-pressure). A reverse flow in
a distribution main or in a customer’s system can be cre-
ated by a change of system pressure wherein the pressure
at the supply point becomes lower than the pressure at
the point of use. When this happens, the water at the
point of use will be siphoned back into the system,
potentially polluting or contaminating it. It is also possi-
ble that contaminated or polluted water could continue
to backflow into the public distribution system. The
point at which nonpotable water comes in contact with
potable water is called a cross-connection.

Examples of backflow causes include supplemental sup-
plies, such as a standby fire protection tank; fire pumps;
chemical feed pumps that overpower the potable water
system pressure; and sprinkler systems.

Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues 8-9



Page 514: Back-Siphonage

Back-siphonage is a siphon action in an undesirable or
reverse direction. When there is a direct or indirect con-
nection between a potable water supply and water of
questionable quality due to poor plumbing design or
installation, there is always a possibility that the public
water supply may become contaminated. Some examples
of common plumbing defects are

* washbasins, sterilizers, and sinks with submerged inlets
or threaded hose bibs and hose;

* oversized booster pumps that overtax the supply
capability of the main and thus develop negative
pressure;

¢ submerged inlets and fire pumps (if the fire pumps are
directly connected into the water main, a negative
pressure will develop); and

* a threaded hose bib in a health-care facility (which is

technically a cross-connection).

There are many techniques and devices for preventing
back-flow and back-siphonage. Some examples are

e Vacuum breakers (nonpressure and pressure);

¢ Back-flow preventers (reduced pressure principle,
double gate-double check valves, swing-connection,
and air gap-double diameter separation);

Surge tanks (booster pumps for tanks, fire system
make-up tank, and covering potable tanks); and

Color coding in all buildings where there is any
possibility of connecting two separate systems or
taking water from the wrong source (blue-potable,
yellow-nonpotable, and other-chemical and gases).

An air gap is a physical separation between the incoming
water line and maximum level in a container of at least
twice the diameter of the incoming water line. If an air
gap cannot be installed, then a vacuum breaker should be
installed. Vacuum breakers, unlike air gaps, must be
installed carefully and maintained regularly. Vacuum
breakers are not completely failsafe.

Other Water Quality Problems

Water not only has to be safe to drink; it should also be
aesthetically pleasing. Various water conditions affect
water quality. Table 8.6 describes symptoms, causes, mea-
surements, and how to correct these problems.

8-10 Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues

Protecting the Groundwater Supply
Follow these tips to help protect the quality of
groundwater supplies:

Periodically inspect exposed parts of wells for cracked,
corroded, or damaged well casings; broken or missing
well caps; and settling and cracking of surface seals.

Slope the area around wells to drain surface runoff
away from the well.

Install a well cap or sanitary seal to prevent
unauthorized use of, or entry into, a well.

Disinfect wells at least once a year with bleach or
hypochlorite granules, according to the manufacturer’s
directions.

Have wells tested once a year for coliform bacteria,
nitrates, and other constituents of concern.

Keep accurate records of any well maintenance, such
as disinfection or sediment removal, that require the
use of chemicals in the well.

Hire a certified well driller for new well construction,
modification, or abandonment and closure.

Avoid mixing or using pesticides, fertilizers, herbicides,
degreasers, fuels, and other pollutants near wells.

Do not dispose of waste in dry or abandoned wells.

Do not cut off well casings below the land surface.

Pump and inspect septic systems as often as
recommended by local health departments.

Never dispose of hazardous materials (e.g., paint, paint
stripper, floor stripper compounds) in a septic system.

References

1. Rhode Island Department of Health and University of
Rhode Island Cooperative Extension Water Quality
Program. Healthy drinking waters for Rhode Islanders.
Kingston, RI: Rhode Island Department of Health and
University of Rhode Island Cooperative Extension Water
Quality Program; 2003. Available from URL: http:/Avww.
uriedu/ce/wa/has/html/Drinking. pdf.

2. US Census Bureau. Historical census of housing graphs:
water supply. Washington, DC: US Census Bureau; no
date. Available from URL: http://www.census.gov/hhes/
www/housing/census/historic/swgraph.html.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 515: Symptoms
Hardness

Sticky curd forms
when soap is added
to water

Causes bathtub ring
Requires more soap

Glassware appears
streaked, scale forms
in pipes

Dissolved iron

- Red stains (red
water) on clothes and
plumbing fixtures

Corrosion of steel
pipes
Metallic taste

Clear water just
drawn begins to form
red particles that
settle to the bottom

Iron bacteria (red slime
appears in toilet)

Brownish-black water
- Fixture stains black
- Fabric stains black
- Bitter coffee and tea

Acidity (corrosion of
copper and steel in
pumps, fixtures, piping
and tanks)

Probable Cause

Calcium and magnesium in
the water, compounded
with biocarbonates,
sulfates, or chlorides.

Iron, from geologic
formations that ground-
water passes through.
Water, an excellent solvent,
jonizes iron and holds it in
solution.

Tron is common in soft
water and when water

hardness is above 175 ppm.

Caused by bacteria that act
in the presence of iron.

Manganese is present
usually along with iron.

Carbon dioxide forms
carbonic acid. Water may
contain H,SO,, HCL, or
nitric acid, but unlikely.

Measurement

Hardness test kits, which
measure in grains per gallon
(gpg) or parts per million
(ppm). 1 gpg = 17.1 ppm

50 ppm is soft water; 50 to
100 ppm is moderately hard
water; 100 to 200 ppm is hard
water; 200 to 300 ppm is very
hard; over 300 ppm is
extremely hard

Atomic absorption (AA) units
or numerous colormetric test
kits measure iron in ppm.

Any measurement above
0.3 ppm will cause problems.

Check under toilet tank cover
for slippery jelly-like coating.

Colormetric tests for manganese
(concentrations above
0.05 mg/L cause problems).

Colormetric field titrametric
tests for acidity, pH, and
carbon dioxide (pH is
determined at the titration

end point). A pH below 6.5
causes corrosion. Carbon
dioxide should be less than

10 mg/L or less than 5 mg/L if
alkalinity is less than 100 ppm.

Corrective Action

If hardness creates problems,
a sodium zeolite ion exchange
water softener or a reverse
osmosis unit can be used.

To treat soft water that
contains no iron but picks it
up in distribution lines, add
calcium to the water with
calcite (limestone) units.

To treat hard water containing
iron ions, install a sodium
zeolite ion exchange unit.

To treat soft water containing
iron, carbon dioxide must be
neutralized, followed by a
manganese zeolite unit.

Kill bacteria by super-
chlorinating pump and piping
system.

Same methods as for iron.

Soda ash solution is fed into
the well or suction line of a
pump. May be fed along with
chlorine solution.

Limestone chips (calcite)
neutralize the water by
increasing its alkalinity and
hardness.

Odors and tastes
- Bitter taste
Rotten egg odor

Salty taste
Flat, soda taste
Salty taste

Chlorine odor/taste

Very high mineral content

Sulfate-reducing bacteria,
hydrogen sulfide

High chloride levels
Bicarbonates

High total dissolved solids
(TDS

High levels of di- or
trichloramines in water

Excess iron, manganese, sulfate

Sulfate levels above 250 mg/L
or any trace of hydrogen sulfide
cause problems

Problems at levels >250 mg/L
Carbonate hardness test

TDS levels above 500 mg/L may
cause problems

Check pH

Table 8.6. Analyzing and Correcting Water Quality Problems (continues on next page)

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues

Methods mentioned above
Chlorinator and filter

Reverse osmosis unit
Aeration unit
Sand filter

Activated charcoal filter




Page 516: Symptoms
Turbidity (cloudy water)

Blue stain on porcelain
fixtures

Lead contamination

Probable Cause

Silt, sediment, large
number of microorganisms
or organic material

Corrosion of copper pipes
and fixtures due to low pH,
hardness, and alkalinity

Leaching from lead service

Measurement

Nephelometric turbidity units
(NTUs) using laboratory
spectrophotometers. (Less than
5 NTUs is best, >10 not
acceptable.)

Langelier index determines
proper balance of pH, hardness,
and alkalinity.

15 parts per billion

Corrective Action

Fine filtering with sand filter
or diatomaceous earth filter.
For ponds, coagulation and
sedimentation are needed.

Methods mentioned above to
adjust pH, hardness, and
alkalinity.

Adjust pH

lines, solder, or brass or
lead fittings

Filtration
Chemical treatment

Table 8.6. Analyzing and Correcting Water Quality Problems (continued)

Additional Sources of Information
American Water Works Association. Available from URL:
http://www.awwa.org.

Drexel University: Drinking water outbreaks. Available
from URL: http://water.sesep.drexel.edu/outbreaks/.

3. US Census Bureau. American housing survey.
Washington, DC: US Census Bureau; 2003. Available
from URL: http://www.census.gov/hhes/ www/housing/
ahs/nationaldata.html.

4. National Ground Water Association. Well system material.
Westerville, OH: National Ground Water Association;
2003. Available from URL: http://www.ngwa.org/pdf/

wellsystemmaterials.pdf

5. US Environmental Protection Agency. Spring
development. Chicago: US Environmental Protection

Agency; 2001.

6. Government of Alberta. Shock chlorination—well
maintenance. Edmonton, Alberta, Canada: Alberta
Agriculture, Food & Rural Development;2001. Available
from URL: http://www! .agric.gov.ab.ca/$department/
deptdocs.nsf/all/wwe411.

7. Boulder GNS Water Well Service and Supply.
Chlorination of water systems. Boulder, CO: Boulder
GNS Water Well Service and Supply; 2002. Available
from URL: http://www.waterwell.cc/ CHLORIN.HTM.

US Environmental Protection Agency: Ground water and
drinking water. Available from URL: http://www.epa.gov/

safewater.

8. Iowa State University Diagnosing and solving common
water-quality problems. Ames, IA: Iowa State University;
1994. Available from URL: http://www.abe.iastate.edu/
HTMDOCS/aen152.pdf.

8-12 Chapter 8: Rural Water Supplies and Water-quality Issues Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 517: Chapter 9: Plumbing

“The society which scorns excellence in plumbing as a humble
activity and tolerates shoddiness in philosophy because it is an
philosophy: neither its pipes nor its theories will hold water.”

John W. Gardner, Secretary,
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, 1965

Introduction

Plumbing may be defined as the practice, materials, and
fixtures used in installing, maintaining, and altering pip-
ing, fixtures, appliances, and appurtenances in connection
with sanitary or storm drainage facilities, a venting sys-
tem, and public or private water supply systems.
Plumbing does not include drilling water wells; installing
water softening equipment; or manufacturing or selling
plumbing fixtures, appliances, equipment, or hardware. A
plumbing system consists of three parts: an adequate
potable water supply system; a safe, adequate drainage
system; and ample fixtures and equipment.

The housing inspector’s prime concern while inspecting
plumbing is to ensure the provision of a safe water supply
system, an adequate drainage system, and ample and
proper fixtures and equipment that do not contaminate
water. The inspector must make sure that the system
moves waste safely from the home and protects the occu-
pants from backup of waste and dangerous gases. This
chapter covers the major features of a residential plumb-
ing system and the basic plumbing terms and principles
the inspector must know and understand to identify
housing code violations that involve plumbing. It will
also assist in identifying the more complicated defects
that the inspector should refer to the appropriate agen-
cies. This chapter is not a plumbing code, but should
provide a base of knowledge sufficient to evaluate house-
hold systems.

Elements of a Plumbing System
The primary purposes of a plumbing system are

¢ To bring an adequate and potable supply of hot and
cold water to the inhabitants of a house, and

° To drain all wastewater and sewage discharge from
fixtures into the public sewer or a private disposal
system.

It is, therefore, very important that the housing inspector
be completely familiar with all elements of these systems
so that inadequacies of the structure’s plumbing and other

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

RISER BRANCH
RISER BRANCH

LAWN

Awe SPRINKLER

SPRINKLER

VALVE

HOT WATER
STORAGE 6
BASEMENT DROP

———HOT WATER
COLD WATER

Figure 9.1. Typical Home Water System [1]

code violations will be recognized. To aid the inspector in
understanding the plumbing system, a schematic of a
home plumbing system is shown in Figure 9.1.

Water Service

The piping of a house service line should be as short as
possible. Elbows and bends should be kept to a minimum
because they reduce water pressure and, therefore, the
supply of water to fixtures in the house. The house ser-
vice line also should be protected from freezing. Four feet
of soil is a commonly accepted depth to bury the line to
prevent freezing. This depth varies, however, across the
country from north to south. The local or state plumbing
code should be consulted for recommended depths. The
minimum service line size should be 34 inch. The mini-
mum water supply pressure should be 40 pounds per
square inch (psi), no cement or concrete joints should be
allowed, no glue joints between different types of plastic
should be allowed, and no female threaded PVC fittings
should be used.

The materials used for a house service may be approved
plastic, copper, cast iron, steel, or wrought iron. The con-
nections used should be compatible with the type of pipe
used. A typical house service installation is pictured in
Figure 9.2. The elements of the service installation are
described below.

Corporation stop—The corporation stop is connected
to the water main. This connection is usually made of
brass and can be connected to the main with a special
tool without shutting off the municipal supply. The valve

Chapter 9: Plumbing 9-1



Page 518: incorporated in the corporation stop permits the pressure
to be maintained in the main while the service to the
building is completed.

Curb stop—The curb stop is a similar valve used to iso-
late the building from the main for repairs, nonpayment,
of water bills or flooded basements. Because the corpora-
CORPORATION tion stop is usually under the street and it is necessary to
li break the pavement to reach the valve, the curb stop is
used as the isolation valve.

STOP BOX

Curb stop box—The curb stop box is an access box to
WATER MAIN the curb stop for opening and closing the valve. A long-

. . . handled wrench is used to reach the valve.
Figure 9.2. House Service Installation [1]

Air chambers—Pressure-absorbing devices that eliminate water hammer. Air chambers should be installed as close as possi-
ble to the valves or faucet and at the end of long runs of pipe.

Air gap (drainage system)—The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the outlet of a water
pipe and the flood level rim of the receptacle into which it is discharging.

Air gap (water distribution system)—The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest
opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.

Backflow—The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply
from any source or sources other than the intended source. Back siphonage is one type of backflow.

Back siphonage—The flowing back of used, contaminated, or polluted water from a plumbing fixture or vessel into a pota-
ble water supply because of negative pressure in the pipe.
Branch—Any part of the piping system other than the main, riser, or stack.
Branch yent—A vent connecting one or more individual vents with a vent stack.

Building drain—Part of the lowest piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste, or other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building (house) and conveys it to the building sewer beginning 3 feet outside the building wall.

Cross connection—Any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate piping systems (one of which
contains potable water and the other which contains either water of unknown or questionable safety or steam, gas, or chemi-
cal) whereby there may be a flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential
between the two systems. (See Backflow and Back siphonage.)

Disposal field—An area containing a series of one or more trenches lined with coarse aggregate and conveying the effluent
from a septic tank through vitrified clay pipe or perforated, nonmetallic pipe, laid in such a manner that the flow will be dis-
tributed with reasonable uniformity into natural soil.

Drain—Any pipe that carries wastewater or waterborne waste in a building (house) drainage system.
Flood level rim—The top edge of a receptacle from which water overflows.

Flushometer valve—A device that discharges a predetermined quantity of water to fixtures for flushing purposes and is
closed by direct water pressures.

Flushometer toilet—a toilet using a flushometer valve that uses pressure from the water supply system rather than the force
of gravity to discharge water into the bowl, designed to use less water than conventional flush toilets.

Flush valve—A device located at the bottom of the tank for flushing toilets and similar fixtures.

9-2 Chapter 9: Plumbing Healthy Housing Reference Manual
P is Y 8




Page 519: Meter stop—The meter stop is a valve placed on the
street side of the water meter to isolate it for installation
or maintenance. Many codes require a gate valve on the
house side of the meter to shut off water for plumbing
repairs. The curb and meter stops can be ruined in a
short time if used very frequently.

The water meter is a device used to measure the amount
of water used in the house. It is usually the property of
the water provider and is a very delicate instrument that
should not be abused. In cold climates, the water meter is

meter is located inside the home, the company providing
the water must make appointments to read the meter,
which often results in higher water costs unless the meter
is equipped with a signal that can be observed from the
outside. The water meter is not shown in Figure 9.2
because of regional differences in location of the unit.

Because the electric system is sometimes grounded to an
older home’s water line, a grounding loop device should
be installed around the meter. Many meters come with a
yoke that maintains electrical continuity even though the

often inside the home to keep it from freezing. When the _ meter is removed.

Grease trap—See Interceptor.

Hot water—Potable water heated to at least 120°F-130°F (49°C-54°C) and used for cooking, cleaning, washing dishes, and
bathing.

Insanitary— Unclean enough to endanger health.

Interceptor—A device to separate and retain deleterious, hazardous, or undesirable matter from normal waste and permit
normal sewage or liquid waste to discharge into the drainage system by gravity.

Main vent—The principal artery of the venting system, to which vent branches may be connected.

Leader—An exterior drainage pipe for conveying storm water from roof or gutter drains to the building storm drain, com-
bined building sewer, or other means of disposal.

Main sewer—See Public sewer.
Pneumatic—Pertaining to devices making use of compressed air as in pressure tanks boosted by pumps.

Potable water— Water having no impurities present in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiologic effects and
conforming in its bacteriologic and chemical quality to the requirements of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Safe
Drinking Water Act or meeting the regulations of other agencies having jurisdiction.

P &T (pressure and temperature) relief valve—A safety valve installed on a hot water storage tank to limit temperature
and pressure of the water.

P-trap—A trap with a vertical inlet and a horizontal outlet.
Public sewer—A common sewer directly controlled by public authority.
Relief vent—An auxiliary vent that permits additional circulation of air in or between drainage and systems.

Septic tank—A watertight receptacle that receives the discharge of a building’s sanitary drain system or part thereof and is
designed and constructed to separate solid from liquid, digest organic matter through a period of detention, and allow the
liquids to discharge into the soil outside of the tank through a system of open-joint or perforated piping or through a seep-

age pit.
Sewerage system—A system comprising all piping, appurtenances, and treatment facilities used for the collection and
disposal of sewage, except plumbing inside and in connection with buildings served, and the building drain.

Soil pipe—The pipe that directs the sewage of a house to the receiving sewer, building drain or building sewer.
Soil stack—The vertical piping that terminates in a roof vent and carries off the vapors of a plumbing system.

Stack vent—An extension of a solid or waste stack above the highest horizontal drain connected to the stack, sometimes
called a waste vent or a soil vent.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual Chapter 9: Plumbing 9-3




Page 520: Hot and Cold Water Main Lines

The hot and cold water main lines are usually hung from
the basement ceiling or in the crawl space of the home
and are attached to the water meter and hot water tank
on one side and the fixture supply risers on the other.
These pipes should be installed neatly and should be sup-
ported by pipe hangers or straps of sufficient strength and
number to prevent sagging. Older homes that have cop-
per pipe with soldered pipes can pose a lead poisoning
risk, particularly to children. In 1986, Congress banned
lead solder containing greater than 0.2% lead and
restricted the lead content of faucets, pipes, and other
plumbing materials to no more than 8%. The water should
be tested to determine the presence or level of lead in the
water. Until such tests can be conducted, the water should
be run for about 2 minutes in the morning to flush any
such material from the line. Hot and cold water lines
should be approximately 6 inches apart unless the hot
water line is insulated. This is to ensure that the cold water
line does not pick up heat from the hot water line [2].

The supply mains should have a drain valve stop and
waste valve to remove water from the system for repairs.
These valves should be on the low end of the line or on
the end of each fixture riser.

The fixture risers start at the basement main and rise ver-
tically to the fixtures on the upper floors. In a one-family
dwelling, riser branches will usually proceed from the
main riser to each fixture grouping. In any event, the fix-
ture risers should not depend on the branch risers for
support, but should be supported with a pipe bracket.

The size of basement mains and risers depends on the
number of fixtures supplied. However, a 34-inch pipe is
usually the minimum size used. This allows for deposits
on the pipe due to hardness in the water and will usually
give satisfactory volume and pressure.

In homes without basements, the water lines are prefera-
bly located in the crawl space or under the slab. The
water lines are sometimes placed in the attic; however,
because of freezing, condensation, or leaks, this place-
ment can result in major water damage to the home. In
two-story or multistory homes, the water line placement
for the second floor is typically between the studs and,
then, for the shortest distance to the fixture, between the
joists of the upper floors.

Hot and Cold Water Piping Materials

Care must be taken when choosing the piping materials.
Some state and local plumbing codes prohibit using some
of the materials listed below in water distribution
systems.

Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC). PVC is used to make plastic
pipe. PVC piping has several applications in and around
homes such as in underground sprinkler systems, piping
for swimming pool pumping systems, and low-pressure
drain systems. PVC piping is also used for water service
between the meter and building [3]. PVC, or polyvinyl
chloride, is one of the most commonly used materials in
the marketplace. It is in packaging, construction and
automotive material, toys, and medical equipment.

Definitions of Terms Related to Home Water Systems

Storm sewer—A sewer used for conveying rain water, surface water, conden

te, cooling water, or similar liquid waste.

Trap—A fitting or device that provides a liquid seal to prevent the emission of sewer gases without materially affecting the

flow of sewage or wastewater through it.

Vacuum breaker—A d.
to relieve negative pressure (vacuum).

to prevent backflow (back

Vapor lock—.

Vent stack— The verti

through one or more stories.

phonage) by means of an opening through v

ch air may be drawn

bubble of air that restricts the flow of water in a pipe.

vent pipe installed to provide air circulation to and from the drainage system and that extends

Water hammer—The loud thump of water in a pipe when a valve or faucet is suddenly closed.

Water service pipe—The pipe from the water main or other sources of potable water supply to the water-distributing

system of the building served.

Water supply system
tings, control valves, and all appurtenar

s in or

Consists of the water service pipe, the water-distributing pipes, the necess:

y connecting pipes, fit-

acent to the building or premis

‘Wet vent—A vent that receives the discharge of waste other than from water closets.

Yoke vent—A pipe connecting upward from a soil or

9-4 Chapter 9: Plumbing

vaste stack to a vent stack to prevent pressure changes in the stacks.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 521: Chlorinated PVC (CPVC). CPVC is a slightly yellow
plastic pipe used inside homes. It has a long service life,
but is not quite as tough as copper. Some areas with cor-
rosive water will benefit by using chlorinated PVC pip-
ing. CPVC piping is designed and recommended for use
in hot and cold potable water distribution systems [4].

Copper. Copper comes in three grades:
¢ M for thin wall pipe (used mainly inside homes);

° L for thicker wall pipe (used mainly outside for water
services); and

° K, the thickest (used mainly between water mains and
the water meter).

Copper lasts a long time, is durable, and connects well to
valves. It should not be installed if the water has a pH of
6.5 or less. Most public utilities supply water at a pH
between 7.2 and 8.0. Many utilities that have source
water with a pH below 6.5 treat the water to raise the
pH. Private well water systems often have a pH below
6.5. When this is the case, installing a treatment system
to make the water less acidic is a good idea [5].

Galvanized Steel. Galvanized pipe corrodes rather easily.
The typical life of this piping is about 40 years. One of
the primary problems with galvanized steel is that, in sat-
urated water, the pipe will become severely restricted by
corrosion that eventually fills the pipe completely.
Another problem is that the mismatch of metals between
the brass valves and the steel results in corrosion.
Whenever steel pipe meets copper or brass, the steel pipe
will rapidly corrode. Dielectric unions can be used
between copper and steel pipes; however, these unions
will close off flow in a short time. The problem with
dielectric unions is that they break the grounding effect if
a live electrical wire comes in contact with a pipe. Some
cities require the two pipes to be bonded electrically to
maintain the safety of grounded pipes.

PEX. PEX is an acronym for a cross-formulated polyeth-
ylene. “PE” refers to the raw material used to make PEX
(polyethylene), and “X” refers to the cross-linking of the
polyethylene across its molecular chains. The molecular
chains are linked into a three-dimensional network that
makes PEX remarkably durable within a wide range of
temperatures, pressures, and chemicals [6].

PEX is flexible and can be installed with fewer fittings
than rigid plumbing systems. It is a good choice for
repiping and for new homes and works well for corrosive
water conditions. PEX stretches to accommodate the
expansion of freezing water and then returns to its origi-
nal size when water thaws. Although it is highly freeze-
resistant, no material is freeze-proof.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Kitec. Kitec is a multipurpose pressure pipe that uniquely
unites the advantages of both metal and plastic. It is
made of an aluminum tube laminated to interior and
exterior layers of plastic. Kitec provides a composite pip-
ing system for a wide range of applications, often beyond
the scope of metal or plastic alone. Unlike copper and
steel materials, Kitec is noncorroding and resists most
acids, salt solutions, alkalis, fats, and oils.

Poly. Poly pipe is a soft plastic pipe that comes in coils
and is used for cold water. It can crack with age or wear
through from rocks. Other weak points can be the stain-
less steel clamps or galvanized couplings.

Polybutylene [Discontinued]. Polybutylene pipe is a soft
plastic pipe. This material is no longer recommended
because of early chemical breakdown. Individuals with a
house, mobile home, or other structure that has polybu-
tylene piping with acetal plastic fittings may be eligible
for financial relief if they have replaced that plumbing
system. For claims information, call 1-800-392-7591 or
go to www.pbpipe.com.

Hot Water Safety

In the United States, more than 112,000 people enter a
hospital emergency room each year with scald burns. Of
these, 6,700 (6%), have to be hospitalized. Almost 3,000
of these scald burns come from tap water in the home.
The three high risk groups are children under the age of
5 years, the handicapped, and adults over the age of 65
years. It only takes 1 second to get a serious third-degree
burn from water that is 156°F (69°C). Tap water is too
hot if instant coffee granules melt in it.

Young children, some handicapped individuals, and
elderly people are particularly vulnerable to tap water
burns. Children cannot always tell the hot water faucets
from the cold water faucets. Children have delicate skin
and often cannot get out of hot water quickly, so they
suffer hot water burns most frequently. Elderly and hand-
icapped persons are less agile and more prone to falls in
the bath tub. They also may have diseases, such as diabe-
tes, that make them unable to feel heat in some regions of
the body, such as the hands and feet. Third-degree burns
can occur quickly—in 1 second at 156°F (69°C), in 2
seconds at 149°F (65°C), in 5 seconds at 140°F (60°C),
and in 15 seconds at 133°F (56°C).

A tap-water temperature of 120°F—130°F (49°C-54°C) is
hot enough for washing clothes, bedding, and dishes.
Even at 130°F (54°C), water takes only a few minutes of
constant contact to produce a third-degree burn. Few
people bathe at temperatures above 110°F (43°C), nor

Chapter 9: Plumbing 9-5



Page 522: should they. Water heater thermostats should be set at
about 120°F (49°C) for safety and to save 18% of the
energy used at 140°F (60°C). Antiscald devices for faucets
and showerheads to regulate water temperature can help
prevent burns. A plumber should install and calibrate
these devices. Most hot water tank installations now
require an expansion tank to reduce pressure fluctuations
and a heat trap to keep hot water from escaping up pipes.

Types of Water Flow Controls

It is essential that valves be used in a water system to
allow the system to be controlled in a safe and efficient
manner. The number, type, and size of valves required
will depend on the size and complexity of the system.
Most valves can be purchased in sizes and types to match
the pipe sizes used in water system installations. Listed
below are some of the more commonly encountered
valves with a description of their basic functions.

Shutoff Valves. Shutoff valves should be installed
between the pump and the pressure tank and between the
pressure tank and service entry to a building. Globe, gate,
and ball valves are common shutoff valves. Gate and ball
valves cause less friction loss than do globe valves; ball
valves last longer and leak less than do gate valves.
Shutoff valves allow servicing of parts of the system with-
out draining the entire system.

Flow-control Valves. Flow-control valves provide uni-
form flow at varying pressures. They are sometimes
needed to regulate or limit the use of water because of
limited water flow from low-yielding wells or an inade-
quate pumping system. They also may be needed with
some treatment equipment. These valves are often used to
limit flow to a fixture. Orifices, mechanical valves, or dia-
phragm valves are used to restrict the flow to any one ser-
vice line or complete system and to assure a minimum
flow rate to all outlets.

Relief Valves. Relief valves permit water or air to escape
from the system to relieve excess pressure. They are
spring-controlled and are usually adjustable to relieve
varying pressures, generally above 60 psi. Relief valves
should be installed in systems that may develop pressures
exceeding the rated limits of the pressure tank or distribu-
tion system. Positive displacement and submersible
pumps and water heaters can develop these excessive pres-
sures. The relief valve should be installed between the
pump and the first shutoff valve and must be capable of
discharging the flow rate of the pump. A combined pres-
sure and temperature relief valve is needed on all water
heaters. Combination pressure and vacuum relief valves

9-6 Chapter 9: Plumbing

also should be installed to prevent vacuum damage to the
system.

Pressure-reducing Valves. A pressure-reducing valve is
used to reduce line pressure. On main lines, this allows
the use of thinner walled pipe and protects house plumb-
ing. Sometimes these valves are installed on individual
services to protect plumbing.

Altitude Valves. Often an altitude valve is installed at the
base of a hot water tank to prevent it from overflowing.
Altitude valves sense the tank level through a pressure line
to the tank. An adjustable spring allows setting the level
so that the valve closes and prevents more inflow when
the tank becomes full.

Foot Valves. A foot valve is a special type of check valve
installed at the end of a suction pipe or below the jet in a
well to prevent backflow and loss of prime. The valve
should be of good quality and cause little friction loss.

Check Valves. Check valves have a function similar to foot
valves. They permit water flow in only one direction
through a pipe. A submersible pump may use several check
valves. One is located at the top of the pump to prevent
backflow from causing back spin of the impellers. Some
systems use another check valve and a snifter valve. They
will be in the drop pipe or pitless unit in the well casing
and allow a weep hole located between the two valves to
drain part of the pipe. When the pump is started, it will
force the air from the drained part of the pipe into the
pressure tank, thus recharging the pressure tank.

Frost-proof Faucets. Frost-proof faucets are installed out-
side a house with the shutoff valve extending into the
heated house to prevent freezing. After each use, the
water between the valve and outlet drains, provided the
hose is disconnected, so water is not left to freeze.

Frost-proof Hydrants. Frost-proof hydrants make out-
door water service possible during cold weather without
the danger of freezing. The shutoff valve is buried below
the frost line. To avoid submerging it, which might result
in contamination and back siphoning, the stop-and-waste
valve must drain freely into a rock bed. These hydrants
are sometimes prohibited by local or state health
authorities.

Float Valves. Float valves respond to a high water level to
close an inlet pipe, as in a tank-type toilet.

Miscellaneous Switches. Float switches respond to a
high and/or low water level as with an intermediate stor-
age tank. Pressure switches with a low-pressure cutoff
stop the pump motor if the line pressure drops to the

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 523: cutoff point. Low-flow cutoff switches are used with sub-
mersible pumps to stop the pump if the water discharge
falls below a predetermined minimum operating pressure.
High-pressure cut-off switches are used to stop pumps if
the system pressure rises above a predetermined maxi-
mum. Paddle-type flow switches detect flow by means of
a paddle placed in the pipe that operates a mechanical
switch when flow in the pipe pushes the paddle.

The inadvertent contamination of a public water supply
as a result of incorrectly installing plumbing fixtures is a
potential public health problem in all communities.
Continuous surveillance by environmental health person-
nel is necessary to know whether such public health haz-
ards have developed as a result of additions or alterations
to an approved system. All environmental health special-
ists should learn to recognize the three general types of
defects found in potable water supply systems: back flow,
back siphonage, and overhead leakage into open potable
water containers. If identified, these conditions should be
corrected immediately to prevent the spread of disease or
poisoning from high concentrations of organic or inor-
ganic chemicals in the water.

‘Water Heaters

Water heaters (Figure 9.3) are usually powered by elec-
tricity, fuel oil, gas, or, in rare cases, coal or wood. They
consist of a space for heating the water and a storage tank
for providing hot water over a limited period of time. All
water heaters should be fitted with a temperature-pressure
(T&P) relief valve no matter what fuel is used. The
installation port for these valves may be found on the top
or on the side of the tank near the top. T&P valves
should not be placed close to a wall or door jamb, where
they would be inaccessible for inspection and use. Hot
water tanks sometimes are sold without the T&P valve,
and it must be purchased separately. This fact alone
should encourage individual permitting and inspection by
counties and municipalities to ensure that they are
installed. The T&P valve should be inspected at a mini-
mum of once per year.

A properly installed T8&P valve will operate when either
the temperature or the pressure becomes too high due to
an interruption of the water supply or a faulty thermo-
stat. Figure 9.3 shows the correct installation of a gas
water heater. Particular care should be paid to the exhaust
port of the T&P valve. Figure 9.4 shows the placement of
the T&P valve. This vent should be directed to within 6
inches of the floor, and care must be taken to avoid
reducing the diameter of the vent and creating any
unnecessary bends in the discharge pipe. Most codes will

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

1 HOT WATER HEATER
2 DRIP LEG (RELIEF VALVE}

16 3 COMBINATION TEMPERATURE AND
PRESSURE RELIEF VALVE WITH
TRY.LEVER

4 HOT WATER LINE

5 FLUE PIPE MUST BE NOT LESS
THAN 28 GAUGE GALVANIZED
SHEET METAL

6 COLD WATER SHUT-OFF VALVE

7 DRAFT HOOD

8 COLD WATER LINE

3 UNION

10 SHUT-OFF VALVE (GROUND JOINT?

1) THEAMOSTAT

12 PILOT LIGHT AND BURNER ACCESS
poor

12 DRIP LEG (GAS LINE)

14 GAS SUPPLY LINE

46 ISHORIZONTAL DRAFT HOOD

(souare)
16 LOW PROFILE DRAFT HOOD

Ss

OPEN SIDE

‘Use where hmadroom is low or where

chimney ts fae trom water heater

Note: Try-Lever should be installed on hor water
tide untess otherwise specified by manuticturer

=

*MUST BE PROTECTED IF WITHIN

6"'mox. 12" OF COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS

Figure 9.3. Gas Water Heater [1]

allow only one 90° bend in the vent. The point is to
avoid any constrictions that could slow down the steam
release from the tank to avoid explosive pressure buildup.

Water heaters that are installed on wooden floors should
have water collection pans with a drainage tube that
drains to a proper drain. The pan should be checked on a
regular basis.

Tankless Water Heaters

A tankless unit has a heating device that is activated by
the flow of water when a hot water valve is opened. Once
activated, the heater delivers a constant supply of hot
water. The output of the heater, however, limits the rate
of the heated water flow. Demand water heaters are avail-
able in propane (LP), natural gas, or electric models.
They come in a variety of sizes for different applications,
such as a whole-house water heater, a hot water source for
a remote bathroom or hot tub, or as a boiler to provide
hot water for a home heating system. They can also be
used as a booster for dishwashers, washing machines, and
a solar or wood-fired domestic hot water system [7].

The appeal of demand water heaters is not only the elimi-
nation of the tank standby losses and the resulting lower
operating costs, but also the fact that the heater delivers
hot water continuously. Most tankless models have a life

Chapter 9: Plumbing 9-7



Page 524: expectancy of more than 20 years. In contrast, storage
tank water heaters last 10 to 15 years. Most tankless
models have easily replaceable parts that can extend their
life by many years more.

Drainage System

Water is brought into a house, used, and discharged
through the drainage system. This system is a sanitary
drainage system carrying just interior wastewater.

Sanitary Drainage System

The proper sizing of the sanitary drain or house drain
depends on the number of fixtures it serves. The usual
minimum size is 4 inches in diameter. The materials used
are usually cast iron, vitrified clay, plastic, and, in rare
cases, lead. The top two pipe choices for drain, waste, and
vent (DWV) systems are PVC or ABS. For proper flow in
the drain, the pipe should be sized and angled so that the
pipe is approximately half full. This ensures proper scour-
ing action so that the solids contained in the waste will

not be deposited in the pipe.
Using PVC in DWV pipe is a two-step process needing a

primer and then cement. ABS uses cement only. In most
cases the decision will be made on the basis of which
material is sold in an area. Few areas stock both materials
because local contractors usually favor one or the other.

™

Figure 9.4. Temperature-Pressure Valve

9-8 Chapter 9: Plumbing

ABS costs more than PVC in many areas, but Schedule
40 PVC DWV solid core pipe is stronger than ABS.
Their durability is similar.

Size of House Drain. The Uniform Plumbing Code
Committee has developed a method of sizing house
drains in terms of fixture units. One fixture unit equals
approximately 7 gallons of water per minute. This is
the surge flow rate of water discharged from a wash basin
in one minute.

All other fixtures have been related to this unit. Fixture
unit values are shown in Table 9.1.

Grade of House Drain. A house drain should be sloped
toward the sewer to ensure scouring of the drain. The
usual pitch of a house or building sewer is a 4-inch drop
in 1 foot of length. The size of the drain is based on the
fixture units flowing into the pipe and the slope of the
drain. Table 9.2 shows the required pipe size for the
system.

House Drain Installation. Typical branch connections to
the main are shown in Figure 9.5.

Fixture and Branch Drains. A branch drain is a waste
pipe that collects the waste from two or more fixtures and
conveys it to the sewer. It is sized in the same way as the
sewer, taking into account that all toilets must have a
minimum 3-inch diameter drain, and only two toilets
may connect into one 3-inch drain. All branch drains
must join the house drain with a Y-fitting as shown in
Figure 9.5. The same is true for fixture drains joining
branch drains. The Y-fitting is used to eliminate, as much
as possible, the deposit of solids in or near the connec-
tion. A buildup of these solids will block the drain.
Recommended minimum sizes of fixture drains are
shown in Table 9.2.

Traps

A plumbing trap is a device used in a waste system to
prevent the passage of sewer gas into the structure and yet
not hinder the fixture’s discharge to any great extent. All
fixtures connected to a household plumbing system
should have a trap installed in the line. The effects of
sewer gases on the human body are well known; many of
the gases are extremely harmful. In addition, certain
sewer gases are explosive.

P-trap. The most commonly used trap is the P-trap
(Figure 9.6). The depth of the seal in a trap is usually 2
inches. A deep seal trap has a 4-inch seal.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 525: As mentioned earlier, the purpose of a trap is to seal out
sewer gases from the structure. Because a plumbing
system is subject to wide variations in flow, and this flow
originates in many different sections of the system,
pressures vary widely in the waste lines. These pressure
differences tend to remove the water seal in the trap. The
waste system must be properly vented to prevent the traps
from siphoning dry, thus losing their water seal and
allowing gas from the sewer into the building.

Objectionable Traps. The S-trap and the 34 S-trap
(Figure 9.7) should not be used in plumbing installations.
They are almost impossible to ventilate properly, and the
3% S-trap forms a perfect siphon. Mechanical traps were
introduced to counteract this problem. It has been found,
however, that the corrosive liquids flowing in the system
corrode or jam these mechanical traps. For this reason,
most plumbing codes prohibit mechanical traps.

The bag trap, an extreme form of S-trap, is seldom found.
Figure 9.7 also shows this type of S-trap.

Traps are used only to prevent the escape of sewer gas
into the structure. They do not compensate for pressure
variations. Only proper venting will eliminate pressure
problems.

Ventilation

A plumbing system is ventilated to prevent trap seal loss,
material deterioration, and flow retardation.

Trap Seal Loss. The seal in a plumbing trap may be lost
due to siphonage (direct and indirect or momentum),
back pressure, evaporation, capillary attraction, or wind

effect. The first two are probably the most common
causes of loss. Figure 9.8 depicts this siphonage process;
Figure 9.9 depicts loss of trap seal.

If a waste pipe is placed vertically after the fixture trap, as
in an S-trap, the wastewater continues to flow after the
fixture is emptied and clears the trap. This is caused by
the pressure of air on the water of the fixture being
greater than the pressure of air in the waste pipe. The
action of the water discharging into the waste pipe
removes the air from that pipe and thereby causes a nega-
tive pressure in the waste line.

Units

3
5
2
1
Slop sink 3
6 ( )

180 square feet of roof

Table 9.1. Fixture Unit Values

Fixture

Combination fixture

Urinal
Shower bath

Floor drain

Maximum Number of Fixtures per Listed Drain Slopet

Diameter of

Pipe, Inches ¥Yg inch per foot

+ Number of fixture units.

¥% inch per foot Ye inch per foot

Table 9.2. Sanitary House Drain Sizes

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Chapter 9: Plumbing 9-9



Page 526: 45° BRANCH
CONNECTION
TO MAIN

90° BRANCH
CONNECTION
TO MAIN

Figure 9.5. Branch Connections

In the case of indirect or momentum siphonage, the flow
of water past the entrance to a fixture drain in the waste
pipe removes air from the fixture drain. This reduces the
air pressure in the fixture drain, and the entire assembly
acts as an aspirator. (Figures 9.10 and 9.11 show plumb-
ing configurations that would allow this type of siphonage
to occur.)

Back Pressure. The flow of water in a soil pipe varies
according to the fixtures being used. Small flows tend to
cling to the sides of the pipe, but large ones form a slug of
waste as they drop. As this slug of water falls down the
pipe, the air in front of it becomes pressurized. As the pres-
sure builds, it seeks an escape point. This point is either a
vent or a fixture outlet. If the vent is plugged or there is no
vent, the only escape for this air is the fixture outlet.

The air pressure forces the trap seal up the pipe into the fix-
ture. If the pressure is great enough, the seal is blown out of
the fixture entirely. Figures 9.8 and 9.9 illustrate the poten-
tial for this type of problem. Large water flow past the vent
can aspirate the water from the trap, while water flow
approaching the trap can blow the water out of the trap.

FULL S-TRAP % S-TRAP BAG TRAP

Figure 9.7. Types of S-traps

9-10 Chapter 9: Plumbing

INLET

CROWN

OUTLET
OVERFLOW

[| =} CLEANOUT
ae

Figure 9.6. P-trap [1]

Vent Sizing. Vent pipe installation
is similar to that of soil and waste
pipe. The same fixture unit criteria
are used. Table 9.3 shows mini-
mum vent pipe sizes.

Vent pipes of less than 14 inches
in diameter should not be used.
Vents smaller than this diameter
tend to clog and do not perform
their function.

OUTLET

Individual Fixture Ventilation.
Figure 9.12 shows a typical instal-
lation of a wall-hung plumbing
unit. This type of ventilation is
generally used for sinks, drinking
fountains, and so forth. Air admit-
tance valves are often used for
individual fixtures. Figure 9.13
shows a typical installation of a
bathtub or shower ventilation sys-
tem. Figure 9.14 shows the proper
vent connection for toilet fixtures
and Figure 9.15 shows a janitor’s
sink or slop sink that has the
proper P-trap. For the plumbing
fixture to work properly, it must
be vented as in Figures 9.13 and
9.14.

OUTLET

OUTLET

Unit Venting. Figures 9.10 and
9.11 show a back-to-back shared
ventilation system for various
plumbing fixtures. The unit vent-

Figure 9.8. Trap Seal:
[a] Seal Intact;

[b] Fixture Draining;
[c] Loss of Gas Seal [1]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 527: ing system is commonly
used in apartment build-
ings. This type of system
saves a great deal of money
and space when fixtures are
placed back-to-back in sep-
arate apartments. It does,
however, pose a problem if
the vents are undersized
because they will aspirate
the water from the other
trap. Figure 9.16 shows a
double combination Y-trap
used for joining the fixtures
to the common soil pipe
fixture on the other side of
the wall.

Wet Venting. Bathroom fix-
ture groupings are com-
monly wet vented; that is,
the vent pipe also is used as
a waste line.

Figure 9.9. Loss of Trap Seal in
Lavatory Sink [1]

Total Drainage System

The drain, soil waste, and vent systems are all connected,
and the inspector should remember the following
fundamentals:

Working vents must provide air to all fixtures to ensure
the movement of waste into the sewer. Improperly vented
fixtures will drain slowly and clog often. They also pres-
ent a health risk if highly toxic and explosive sewer gases
enter the home. Correct venting is shown in Figures
9.10-9.15; incorrect venting is shown in Figures 9.8 and
9.9. A wet vent can result in one of the traps siphoning
the other dry when large volumes of water are poured
down the drain. Wet vents are not permitted by many
state plumbing codes because of the potential for
self-siphoning.

Backup of sewage into sinks, dishwashers, and other
appliances is always a possibility unless the system is
equipped with air gaps or vacuum breakers. All connec-
tions to the potable water system must be a minimum of
two pipe diameters above the overflow of the appliance
and, in some cases, where flat surfaces are near, two and
one-half pipe diameters above the overflow of the
appliance.

A simple demonstration of how easily siphoning can
occur is to hold a glass of water with food coloring in it
with the tip of a faucet in the colored water. If the sink’s

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Figure 9.11. Back-to-back Venting [Sink]

vegetable sprayer is directed to a second glass and sprayed,
in most cases, the colored water will be aspirated into the
faucet and then out of the sprayer into the second glass.
Weed or pest killer attachments that hook to garden hoses
work on the same principle. Figure 9.17 shows an outside
hose bib equipped with a vacuum breaker. In the areas of
the United States that freeze, these vacuum breakers must
be removed because they trap water in the area of the line
that can freeze and burst. Many vacuum breakers sold
today automatically drain to prevent freeze damage.

Chapter 9: Plumbing 9-11



Page 528: Fixture Supply Line, Inches Vent Line, Inches Drain Line, Inches

B 1
th 1

Shower % 2 2
Toilet tank Ts 3 3

Devices that pull water from a utility may create negative
pressures that can damage water piping and pull danger-
ous substances into the line at the same time. These
devices include power sprayers that hook to the home
hose bib (outside faucets) and pressurize the spray by
creating a vacuum on the supply side.

Corrosion Control

To understand the proper maintenance procedures for the
prevention and elimination of water quality problems in
plumbing systems, it is necessary to understand the pro-
cess used to determine the chemical aggressiveness of
water. The process is used to determine when additional
treatment is needed. Water that is out of balance can
result in many negative outcomes, from toxic water to
damaged and ruined equipment.

FLOOR LINE

—— MAIN VENT Water dissolves and carries materials when it is not satu-
rated. An equilibrium among pH, temperature, alkalinity,
WASTE PIPE and hardness controls water’s ability to create scale or to
dissolve material. If water is saturated with harmless or
beneficial substances, such as calcium, then the threat of
damage can be mitigated. The Langelier method, devel-
oped in the early 1930s, is a process used in boiler man-
agement, municipal water treatment, and swimming
pools to provide this balance. In the Langelier index, sat-
uration over 0.3 is scale forming, and a saturation below
0.3 is corrosive.

Figure 9.12. Wall-hung Fixtures

SOIL PIPE

BASEMENT FLOO

ME Ee

UNDERGROUND SEWER

Figure 9.13. Unit Vent Used in Bathtub Installation Figure 9.14. Toilet Venting

9-12 Chapter 9: Plumbing Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 529: SLOP SINK
Figure 9.15. Janitor’s Sink

SINK

The susceptibility of metal to corrosion is as follows

(most susceptible to least susceptible): magnesium, zinc,
aluminum, cadmium, mild steel, cast iron, stainless steel
(active), lead-tin solder, lead, tin, brass, gun metal, alumi-
num bronze, copper, copper-nickel alloy, Monel, titanium,
stainless steel (passive), silver, gold, and platinum.

‘Water Conservation

How much attention should be paid to fixtures that just
drip a little bit of water or that just will not quite shut
off? At 30 drops per minute, you will lose and pay for 54
gallons per month. At 60 drops per minute, you will lose
and pay for 113 gallons per month. At 120 drops per
minute, you will lose and pay for 237 gallons per month.

This is only a small loss of water considering the 5 to 7
gallons per flush used by a properly functioning toilet. If
the toilet is not properly maintained, the loss of water and
its effect on the monthly water bill can be incredible.
Lower flow toilets have been mandated to save precious
and limited resources. Most pre-1992 toilets used up to 7
gallons per flush. Toilets have since evolved to use 5.5,
then 3.5, and now 1.6 gallons per flush.

With the changes in the water usage laws in 1992, there
were many customer
complaints, and plumb-
ers were in the bad posi-
tion of installing
products that nobody
wanted to use. New and
updated products now
work better than the old
water wasters.

Figure 9.16. Common Y-trap

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

According to the
EPA, in 2000, a typi-
cal U.S. family of
four spent approxi-
mately $820 every
year on water and
sewer fees, plus
another $230 in
energy for heating
water. In many cities, according to the U.S. EPA, water
and sewer costs can be more than twice those amounts.
Many people do not realize how much money they can
save by taking simple steps to save water, and they do not
know the cumulative effects small changes can have on
water resources and environmental quality. Fixing a leaky
faucet, toilet, or lawn-watering system can reduce water
consumption. Changing to water-efficient plumbing
fixtures and appliances can result in major water and
energy savings [9,10].

Figure 9.17. Hose Bib With Vacuum Breaker

Summer droughts remind many of the need to appreciate
clean water as an invaluable resource. As the U.S. popula-
tion increases, the need for clean water supplies continues
to grow dramatically and puts additional stress on our
limited water resources. We can all take steps to save and
conserve this valuable resource.

The EPA [11] suggests the following steps homeowners
should take right away to save water and money:

¢ Stop leaks!—Check indoor water-using appliances
and devices for leaks. Pay particular attention to toilets
that leak.

° Take showers—Showers use considerably less water
than do baths.

* Replace shower heads—Replacement shower heads
are available that reduce water use.

¢ Turn the water off when not needed— While
brushing your teeth, turn the water off until you need
to rinse.

* Replace your old toilet—The largest water user inside
the home is the toilet. Ifa home was built before 1992
and the toilet has never been replaced, it is very likely
that it is not a water-efficient, 1.6 gallons-per-flush
toilet. Choose a replacement toilet carefully to ensure
that what you make up per individual flush, you do
not lose because you must flush more often.

¢ Replace your clothes washer—The second largest
water user in the home is the washing machine. Energy
Star-rated washers that also have a water factor at or

Chapter 9: Plumbing 9-13



Page 530: 9-14

lower than 9.5 use 35%-50% less water and 50% less
energy per load. This saves money on both water and
energy bills.

Plant the right plants with proper landscape design
and irrigation—Select plants that are appropriate for
the local climate. Having a 100% turf lawn in a dry
desert climate uses a significant amount of water. Also,
home owners should consider the benefits of a more
natural landscape or wildscape.

Water plants only as needed—Most water wasted in
the garden is by watering when plants do not need it

Chapter 9: Plumbing

or by not maintaining the irrigation system. If
manually watering, set a timer and move the hose
promptly. Make sure the irrigation controller has a
rain shutoff device and that it is appropriately

scheduled. Drip irrigation should be considered where

practical. Newer irrigation systems have sensors to
prevent watering while it is raining.

Putting It All Together

These photographs, taken during construction of a home

by Habitat for Humanity, show various plumbing ele-
ments discussed in this chapter.

A.

Hot and cold copper water lines and drain, p-trap and
vent, and vent for the washer drain shown. When a
house is vacant for awhile, the P-trap should be filled
with water to prevent sewer gas from entering the
home. Mineral oil added to the water can slow the loss
of fluid in the trap.

B.
Hot and cold water pipes, soil pipe, and vent shown.

(

Vent for the sink and toilet, soil pipe, and cap for
toilet connection shown. A wax or plastic seal shaped
like a donut will be placed on the cap before bolting
down the toilet.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 531: References
1.

4.

US Environmental Protection Agency. United States
Environmental Protection Agency guidance from hotline
compendium: lead ban. Washington, DC: US
Environmental Protection Agency; 1988. Available from
URL: http://www.epa.gov/safewater/wsg/wsg_H19.pdf.

Uni-Bell PVC Pipe Association. Handbook of PVC pipe
design and construction. Dallas: Uni-Bell PVC Pipe
Association; 2001. Available from URL: http://www.
uni-bell.org/pubs/handbook.pdf.

Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Safety
hazard information bulletin on the use of polyvinyl
chloride (PVC) pipe in above ground installations.
Washington, DC: Occupational Safety and Health
Administration; 1988. http://www.osha.gov/dts/hib/hib
data/hib19880520.html.

Copper Development Association. Copper in your home:

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Mixing and antiscald water flow control, vent for
fixture, hot and cold water lines, and bathtub overflow
shown. At this point in construction, insulation might
be considered for the hot water lines. Water service
and waste water line.

ES

Polyethylene water service pipe entering the home
through the concrete basement wall shown. White
plastic adapter shown between polyethylene water
service pipe and 34 inch copper water line. A short
distance above the adapter is a pressure reducing valve.
To the right of water line is the 4-inch PVC pipe waste
water line.

plumbing, heating, cooling. New York: Copper
Development Association; no date. Available from URL:
hetp://www.copper.org/copperhome/PHC/phc_home.htnl.

Plastic Pipe and Fittings Association. Cross-linked
polyethylene. Glen Ellyn, IL: Plastic Pipe and Fittings
Association; no date. Available from URL: http://www.
ppfahome.org/pex/historypex.html.

NAMCO. Determine the total fixture unit load. Dallas:
NAMCO; no date. Available from URL: http://www.
namco-div.com/booster/sel%20criteria/fixtureload.htm.

Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Clearinghouse.
Demand (tankless or instantaneous) water heaters.
Merrifield, VA: Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
Clearinghouse; no date. Available from URL:

http://www.toolbase.org/tertiary T-asp? DocumentID=3206
&&&CategoryID=0.

Chapter 9: Plumbing = 9-15



Page 532: 8. Public Health-Seattle and King County. Public health
plumbing program: water supply fixture units (WSFU)
and minimum fixture branch pipe sizes. Seattle, WA:
Public Health-Seattle and King County; no date. Available
from URL: http://www.metrokc.gov/health/plumbing/
wsfu.htm.

9. US Environmental Protection Agency. Developing water
system financial capacity. Washington, DC: US
Environmental Protection Agency; 2002. Available from
URL: http://www.epa.gov/safewater/dwa/electronic/
presentations/pwsoper/fincapacity.pdf.

10. US Environmental Protection Agency. Water and
wastewater pricing. Washington, DC: US Environmental
Protection Agency; no date. Available from URL:

http://www.epa.gov/water/infrastructure/pricing/.

11. US Environmental Protection Agency. Using water wisely
in the home. Washington, DC: US Environmental
Protection Agency; 2002. Available from URL:
http://www.epa.gov/owm/water-efficiency/
waterconservation_final.pdf.

Additional Sources of Information

American Backflow Prevention Association. Available
from URL: http://www.abpa.org.

American Society of Plumbing Engineers. Available from
URL: http://aspe.org.

American Society of Sanitary Engineering. Available from
URL: http://www.asse-plumbing.org.

American Water Works Association. Available from URL:
http://www.awwa.org.

National Sanitation Foundation. Available from URL:
http://www.nsf.org/international.

Plumbing-Heating-Cooling Contractors Association.
Available from URL: http://www.phccweb.org.

Underwriters Laboratories Inc. Available from URL:
http://www.ul.com.

For more water conservation tips and energy saving ideas
for businesses, industries, and individuals, visit the EPA’s
Water-use Efficiency Program Web site (http://www.epa.
gov/owm/water-efficiency/index.htm).

9-16 Chapter 9: Plumbing

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 533: Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment

“Technology has made large populations possible;
large populations now make technology indispensable.”

Joseph Wood Krutch, Author, 1932

Introduction

The French are considered the first to use an under-
ground septic tank system in the 1870s. By the mid
1880s, two-chamber, automatic siphoning septic tank sys-
tems, similar to those used today, were being installed in
the United States. Even now, more than a century later,
septic tank systems represent a major household wastewa-
ter treatment option. Fully one-fourth to one-third of the
homes in the United States use such a system [1].

On-site sewage disposal systems are used in rural areas
where houses are spaced so far apart that a sewer system
would be too expensive to install, or in areas around cities
where the city government has not yet provided sewers to
which the homes can connect. In these areas, people
install their own private sewage treatment plants. As pop-
ulations continue to expand beyond the reach of munici-
pal sewer systems, more families are relying on individual
on-site wastewater treatment systems and private water
supplies. The close proximity of on-site water and waste-
water systems in subdivisions and other developed areas,
reliance on marginal or poor soils for on-site wastewater
disposal, and a general lack of understanding by home-
owners about proper septic tank system maintenance pose
a significant threat to public health. The expertise on
inspecting, maintaining, and installing these systems gen-
erally rests with the environmental health staff of the
local county or city health departments.

These private disposal systems are typically called septic
tank systems. A septic tank is a sewage holding device
made of concrete, steel, fiberglass, polyethylene, or other

Figure 10.1. Conventional On-site Septic System [2]
Effluent leaves home through a pipe, enters a septic tank, travels through a
distribution box to a trench absorption system composed of perforated pipe.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

approved material cistern, buried in a yard, which may
hold 1,000 gallons or more of wastewater. Wastewater
flows from the home into the tank at one end and leaves
the tank at the other (Figure 10.1) [2].

Proper maintenance of septic tanks is a public health
necessity. Enteric diseases such as cryptospordiosis, giardi-
asis, salmonellosis, hepatitis A, and shigellosis may be
transmitted through human excrement. Historically,
major epidemics of cholera and typhoid fever were pri-
marily caused by improper disposal of wastewater. The
earliest epidemiology lesson learned was through the
effort of Dr. John Snow of England (1813-1858) during
a devastating cholera epidemic in London [3]. Dr. Snow,
known as the father of field epidemiology, discovered that
the city's water supply was being contaminated by
improper disposal of human waste. He published a brief
pamphlet, On the Mode of Communication of Cholera,
suggesting that cholera is a contagious disease caused by a
poison that reproduces in the human body and is found
in the vomitus and stools of cholera patients. He believed
that the main, although not only, means of transmission
was water contaminated with this poison. This differed
from the commonly accepted belief at the time that dis-
eases were transmitted by inhaling vapors.

Treatment of Human Waste

Safe, sanitary, nuisance-free disposal of wastewater is a
public health priority in all population groups, small and
large, rural or urban. Wastewater should be disposed of in
a manner that ensures that

* community or private drinking water supplies are not
threatened;

¢ direct human exposure is not possible;

* waste is inaccessible to vectors, insects, rodents, or
other possible carriers;

¢ all environmental laws and regulations are complied
with; and

* odor or aesthetic nuisances are not created.

In Figure 10.2, a straight pipe from a nearby home
discharges untreated sewage that flows from a shallow
drainage ditch to a roadside mountain creek in which
many children and some adults wade and fish. The clear
water (Figure 10.3) is quite deceptive in terms of the
health hazard presented. A 4-mile walk along the creek

Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment 10-1



Page 534: . >
Figure 10.2. Straight Pipe Discharge
Source: Donald Johnson; used with permission.

Figure 10.3. Clear Creek Water Contaminated With Sewage
Source: Donald Johnson; used with permission.

revealed 12 additional pipes that were also releasing
untreated sewage. Some people in the area reportedly
regard this creek as a source of drinking water.

Raw or untreated domestic wastewater (sewage) is
primarily water, containing only 0.1% of impurities that
must be treated and removed. Domestic wastewater
contains biodegradable organic materials and, very likely,
pathogens. The primary purpose of wastewater treatment
is to remove impurities and release the treated effluent
into the ground or a stream. There are various processes
for accomplishing this:

Lp

° Centralized treatment—Publicly owned treatment
works (POTWs) that use primary (physical) treatment
and secondary (biologic) treatment on a large scale to
treat flows of up to millions of gallons or liters per day,

¢ Treatment on-site—Septic tanks and absorption fields
or variations thereof, and

Stabilization ponds (lagoons) —Centralized
treatment for populations of 10,000 or less when soil
conditions are marginal and land space is ample.

Not included are pit privies and compost toilets.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 535: Historically, wastewater disposal systems are categorized
as water-carrying and nonwater-carrying. Nonwater-
carried human fecal waste can be contained and decom-
posed on-site, the primary examples being a pit privy or
compost toilet. These systems are not practical for indi-
vidual residences because they are inconvenient and they
expose users to inclement weather, biting insects, and
odors. Because of the depth of the disposal pit for privies,
they may introduce waste directly into groundwater. It
should be noted that these types of systems are often used
and may be acceptable in low-water-use conditions such
as small campsites or along nature trails [4—6].

On-site Wastewater Treatment Systems

As urban sprawl continues and the population increases
in rural areas, the cost of building additional sewage dis-
posal systems increases. One of the prime reasons for
annexation is to increase the tax base without increasing
the cost of municipal government. The governments
involved often buy into short-term tax gains at massive
long-term costs for eventual infrastructure improvements
to annexed communities. Installing septic tank systems is
common to provide on-site disposal systems, but it is a
temporary solution at best. Because property size must be
sufficient to allow space for septic system replacement,
the cost to the municipality installing a centralized sewer
system will be dramatically increased because of the large
lot size.

Two microbiologic processes occur in all methods that
attempt to decompose domestic wastewater: anaerobic
(by bacteria that do not require oxygen) and aerobic (by
bacteria that require oxygen) decomposition. Aerobic
decomposition is generally preferred because aerobic bac-
teria decompose organic matter (sewage) at a rate much
faster than do anaerobic bacteria and odors are less likely.
Centralized wastewater treatment facilities use aerobic
processes, as do most types of lagoons. Septic tank sys-
tems use both processes.

Septic Tank Systems

Approximately 21% of American homes are served by on-

site sewage disposal systems. Of these, 95% are septic
tank field systems. Septic tank systems are used as a
means of on-site wastewater treatment in many homes,
both in rural and urban areas, in the United States. If
maintained and operated within acceptable parameters,
they are capable of properly treating wastewater for a lim-
ited number of years and will need both routine mainte-

nance and eventually major repairs. Proper placement and

installation is a key to the successful operation of any on-

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

site wastewater treatment system, but septic tank systems
have a finite life expectancy and all such systems will
eventually fail and need to be replaced. Figure 10.4 shows
a typical rural home with a well and a septic system.

Septic tank systems generally are composed of the septic
tank, distribution box, absorption field (also known as
the soil drain field), and leach field. The septic tank
serves three purposes: sedimentation of solids in the
wastewater, storage of solids, and anaerobic breakdown of
organic materials.

To place the septic tank and absorption field in a way
that will not contaminate water wells, groundwater, or
streams, the system should be 10 feet from the house and
other structures, at least 5 feet from property lines, 50
feet from water wells, and 25 feet from streams. The
entire system area should be easily identifiable. There
have been occasions when owners have paved or built
over the area. The local health code authorities must be
consulted on required distances in their area because of
soil and groundwater issues.

Aerobic, or aerated, septic systems use a suspended
growth wastewater treatment process, and can remove
suspended solids that are not removed by simple sedi-
mentation. Under appropriate conditions, aerobic units
may also provide for nitrification of ammonia, as well as
significant pathogen reduction. Some type of primary
treatment usually precedes the aerated tank. The tanks
contain an aeration chamber, with either mechanical aera-
tors or blowers, or air diffusers, and an area for final clari-
fication/settling. Aerobic units may be designed as either
continuous flow or batch flow systems. The continuous
flow type are the most commercially available units.

Replacement Area

Figure 10.4. Septic Tank System [7]

Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment 10-3



Page 536: Effluent from the aerated tank is conveyed either by grav-
ity flow or pumping to either further treatment/ pretreat-
ment processes or to final treatment and disposal in a
subsurface soil disposal system. Various types of pretreat-
ment may be used ahead of the aerobic units, including
septic tanks and trash traps.

The batch flow system collects and treats wastewater over
a period of time, then discharges the settled effluent at
the end of the cycle [8].

Aerobic units may be used by individual or clustered resi-
dences and establishments for treating wastewater before
either further treatment/pretreatment or final on-site sub-
surface treatment and disposal. These units are particu-
larly applicable where enhanced pretreatment is
important, and where there is limited availability of land
suitable for final on-site disposal of wastewater effluent.
Because of their need for routine maintenance to ensure
proper operation and performance, aerobic units may be
well-suited for multiple-home or commercial applica-
tions, where economies of scale tend to reduce mainte-
nance and/or repair costs per user. The lower organic and
suspended solids content of the effluent may allow a
reduction of land area requirements for subsurface dis-
posal systems.

A properly functioning septic tank will remove approxi-
mately 75% of the suspended solids, oil, and grease from
effluent. Because the detention time in the tank is 24
hours or less, there is not a major kill of pathogenic bac-
teria. The bacteria will be removed in the absorption field
(drain field). However, there are soils and soil conditions
that prohibit the ability of a drain field to absorb effluent
from the septic tank.

Septic tanks are sized to retain the total volume of sewage
produced by a household in a 24-hour period. Normally
a 1,000-gallon tank is the minimum size to use. State or
local codes generally require larger tanks as the potential
occupancy of the home increases (e.g., 1,250 gallons for
four bedrooms) and may require two tanks in succession
when inadequate soils require alternative system installa-
tion. Figure 10.5 shows a typical septic tank.

Distribution boxes are not required by most on-site
plumbing codes or by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency. When used, distribution boxes provide a conve-
nient inspection port. In addition, if a split system
absorption field is installed (two separate absorption

trench systems), the distribution box is a convenient place
to install a diversion valve for annually alternating absorp-

tion fields.

10-4 Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment

Absorption Field Site Evaluation

The absorption field has a variety of names, including
leach field, tile field, drain field, disposal field, and nitrifi-
cation field. The effluent from the septic tank is directed
to the absorption field for final treatment. The suitability
of the soil, along with other factors noted below, deter-
mines the best way to properly treat and dispose of the
wastewater.

Most, but unfortunately not all, states require areas not
served by publicly owned sewers to be preapproved for
on-site wastewater disposal before home construction
through a permitting process. This process typically
requires a site evaluation by a local environmental health
specialist, soil scientist, or, in some cases, a private con-
tractor. To assist in the site evaluation process, soil survey
maps from the local soil conservation service office may
be used to provide general information about soils in the
area.

The form shown in Figure 10.6 is typical of those used in
conducting a soil evaluation.

Sites for on-site wastewater disposal are first evaluated for
use with a conventional septic tank system. Evaluation
factors include site topography, landscape position, soil
texture, soil structure, internal drainage, depth to rock or
other restrictive horizons, and useable area. If the criteria
are met, a permit is issued to allow the installation of a
conventional septic tank system. Areas that do not meet
the criteria for a conventional system may meet less-
restrictive criteria for an alternative type of system.

Many sites are unsuitable for any type of on-site wastewa-
ter disposal system because of severe topographic limita-
tions, poor soils, or other evaluation criteria. Such sites

Access Ports

Pas a,

Sanitary
Tee Outlet

Figure 10.5. Septic Tank [9]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 537: SAMPLE ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM SITE EVALUATION FORM

Location
Owners Name

Application No.
Applicant's. Name

| 1. Topography (slopepercent) Sf SPS ud SPS
12. Landscape Position TS PS ty SPS
3. Soil Texture and Group | SPS ss

4. Soil Structure an ae

S_ PS U

5._Internal Soil Drainage er a as Ey. eee
&._ Soil Depth (inches) a a Ce ee
7._Restrictive Horizons a ee ee ee

8. Available Space

9. Overall Site Classification ———————_ EE

10. Soil Series (if available

S_PS__U Ps

PS
PS

Ss
Ss
s

U
U
U

SI U

$=Suitable PS=Provisionally Suitable U = Unsuitable
11. List site and/or system modifications or alternatives required for site approval and the specific

area selected for the system.
12. Percolation test required Yes. No:

Figure 10.6. On-site Sewage Disposal System Site Evaluation Form

should not be used for on-site wastewater disposal
because of the high likelihood of system failure.

Some states and localities may require a percolation test
as part of the site evaluation process. As a primary
evaluation method, percolation tests are a poor indicator
of the ability of a soil to treat and move wastewater
throughout the year. However, information obtained by
percolation tests may be useful when used in conjunction
with a comprehensive soil analysis.

Absorption Field Trench

A conventional absorption field trench (Figure 10.7), also
known as a rock lateral system, is the most common
system used on level land or land with moderate slopes
with adequate soil depth above the water table or other
restrictive horizons. The effluent from the septic tank
flows through solid piping to a distribution box or, in many
cases, straight to an absorption field. With the conventional
system and most alternative systems, the effluent flows
through perforated pipes into gravel-filled trenches and
subsequently seeps through the gravel into the soil.

The local regulatory agency should be consulted about
the acceptable depth of the absorption field trench. Some
states require as much as 4 feet of separation beneath the
bottom of the trench and the groundwater. The depth of
absorption field trenches should be at least 18 inches, and
ideally no deeper than 24 inches. The absorption field
pipe should be laid flat with no slope. There should be a

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

minimum of 12 to 18 inches of acceptable soil below the
bottom of the trench to any bedrock, water table, or
restrictive horizon. The length of the trench should not
exceed 100 feet for systems using a distribution box.
Serpentine systems may be several hundred feet long and
should be filled with crushed or fragmented clean rock or
gravel in the bottom 6 inches of the trench. Perforated
4-inch-diameter pipe is laid on top of the gravel then
covered with an additional 2 inches of rock and leveled for
a total of 12 inches. A geotextile material or a biodegradable
material such as straw should be placed over the gravel
before backfilling the trench to prevent soil from clogging
the spaces between the rocks.

One or more monitoring ports should be installed in the
absorption area extending to the bottom of the gravel to
allow measurement of the actual liquid depth in the
gravel. This is essential for subsequent testing of the
adequacy of the system.

Figure 10.7. Cross-section of an Absorption Field [10]

Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment 10-5



Page 538: As a general rule, using longer and narrower trenches to
meet square footage requirements produces a better work-
ing and longer lasting ground absorption sewage disposal
system. Studies have shown that as septic systems age, the
majority of effluent absorption by the soil is provided by
lateral movement through the trench sidewalls. Longer
and narrower trenches (such as 400 feet long by 2 feet
wide instead of 200 feet by 4 feet to obtain 800 square
feet) greatly increase the sidewall area of the system for
lateral movement of wastewater.

Alternative Septic Tank Systems

As the cost of land for home building increases and the
availability of land decreases, land that was once consid-
ered unsuitable is being developed. This land often has
poor soil and drainage properties. Such sites require a
considerable amount of engineering skill to design an
acceptable wastewater disposal system. In many cases,
sites are not acceptable for seepage systems within a rea-
sonable cost. These systems are primarily regulated by
state and local government and, before use, approval must
be obtained from the appropriate regulatory agencies.
Even if a site is approved in one state or county jurisdic-
tion, a similar site may not be approved in another.

The primary difficulty with septic tank systems is treating
effluent in slowly permeable or marginal soils. Low-water-
use devices, when installed, may make it possible to use a
small percentage of septic tank systems in marginal soil.
However, low-water-use devices are usually required as
part of a larger effort to develop a usable alternative sew-
age disposal system. Alternative sewage disposal methods
that can be used if regular subsurface disposal is not
appropriate are numerous [11]. Some of the more com-
mon alternative systems are described below.

Advantages

May be used in areas with high groundwater, bedrock,
or restrictive clay soil near the surface

Space efficient compared to conventional rock
lateral systems

Allows home building in areas unsuitable for below
grade systems

Mound Systems

A mound system (Table 10.1) is elevated above the natu-
ral soil surface to achieve the desired vertical separation
from a water table or impervious material. The elevation
is accomplished by placing sand fill material on top of the
best native soil stratum. At least 1 foot of naturally occur-
ring soil is necessary for a mound system to function
properly. Minimizing water usage in the home also is crit-
ical to prevent effluent from weeping through the sides of
the mound (Figure 10.8).

When a mound system is constructed, the septic tank
usually receives wastewater from the house by gravity
flow. A lift station is located in the second compartment
or in a separate tank to pump the effluent up to the dis-
tribution piping in the mound. Floats in the lift station
control the size of the pumped effluent dose. An alarm
should be installed to alert the homeowner of pump fail-
ure so that repairs can be made before the pump tank
overfills.

Low-Pressure Pipe Systems

Low-pressure pipe (LPP) systems may also be used where
the soil profile is shallow. These systems are similar to
mounds except that they use naturally occurring soil as it
exists on-site instead of elevating the disposal field with
soil fill material. LPP systems are installed with a trench-
ing machine at depths of 12 to 18 inches. The LPP sys-
tem consists of a septic tank, high-water alarm, pumping
tank, supply line, manifold, lateral line, and submersible
effluent pump (Figure 10.9).

When septic tank effluent rises to the level of the pump
control in the pumping tank, the pump turns on, and
effluent moves through the supply line and distribution

Disadvantages
Must be installed on relatively level lots

Periodic flushing of the distribution network is required

System may be expensive

Water softener wastes, common household chemicals,
and detergents are not harmful to this system

Table 10.1. Mound System Advantages and Disadvantages

10-6 Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment

System may be difficult to design

Regular inspection of the pumps and controls necessary to
maintain the system in proper working condition

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 539: Figure 10.8. Mound System Cutaway [3]

laterals. The laterals contain small holes and are typically
placed 3 to 8 feet apart. From the trenches, the effluent
moves into the soil where it is treated. The pump turns
off when the effluent falls to the lower control. Dosing
takes place one to two times daily, depending on the
amount of effluent generated. Pump malfunctions set off
an alarm to alert the homeowner. The time between doses
allows the effluent to be absorbed into the soil and also
allows oxygen to reenter the soil to break down solids that
may be left behind. If the pump malfunctions, an alarm
notifies the homeowner to contact a qualified septic sys-
tem contractor. The pump must be repaired or replaced
quickly to prevent the pump tank from overflowing.
Table 10.2 shows the advantages and disadvantages of
LPP systems.

Advantages

Space requirements are nearly half those of a conventional
septic tank system

Pressurized Distribution Netwon

Pump Chamber
From Sepuc Tank

Figure 10.9. Low Pressure On-site System [12]

Plant-rock Filter Systems (Constructed Wetlands)
Considered experimental in some states, plant-rock filter
systems are being used with great success in Kentucky,
Louisiana, and Michigan. Plant-rock filters generally con-
sist of a septic tank (two-compartment), a rock filter, and
a small overflow lateral (absorption) field. Overflow from
the septic tank is directed into the rock filter. The rock
filter is a long narrow trench (3 to 5 feet wide and 60 to
100 feet long) lined with leak-proof polyvinyl chloride or
butylplastic to which rock is added. A 2- to 4-inch-diam-
eter rock is used below the effluent flow line and larger
rock above (Figure 10.10).

Plant-rock filter systems are typically sized to allow 1.3
cubic feet of rock area per gallon of total daily waste flow.
A typical size for a three-bedroom house would be 468
square feet of interior area. Various width-to-length ratios
within the parameters listed above could be used to
obtain the necessary square footage. The trenches can
even be designed in an “L” shape to accommodate small
building lots.

Treatment begins in the septic tank. The partially treated
wastewater enters the lined plant-rock filter cell through
solid piping, where it is distributed across the cell. The
plants within the system introduce oxygen into the waste-

Disadvantages

Some low-pressure pipe systems may gradually accumulate
solids at the dead-ends of the lateral lines; therefore,
maintenance is required

Can be installed on irregular lot shapes and sizes Electric components are necessary

Can be installed at shallower depths and requires less top- | Design and installation may be difficult; installers with
soil cover experience with such systems should be sought

Installation sites are left in their natural condition

Table 10.2. Low-pressure Pipe Systems Advantages and Disadvantages

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment 10-7



Page 540: Free Water Surface

Qutiat

From Saetic Tank Low Permeability

Subsurface Flow

Berm

From Septic Tank /

/

Impervious Liner

Figure 10.10. Plant-rock Filter system [12]

water through their roots. As the wastewater becomes
oxygenated, beneficial microorganisms and fungi thrive
on and around the roots, which leads to digestion of
organic matter. In addition, large amounts of water are
lost through evapotranspiration. The kinds of plants most
widely used in these systems include cattails, bulrush,
water lilies, many varieties of iris, and nutgrass. Winter
temperatures have little effect because the roots are doing
the work in these systems, and they stay alive during the
winter months. Discharge from wetlands systems may
require disinfection. The advantages and disadvantages of
the plant-rock filter system are shown in Table 10.3.

Maintaining On-site Wastewater
Treatment Systems
Do’s and don'ts inside the house:

* Do conserve water. Putting too much water into the
septic system can eventually lead to system failure.

Advantages

Approximately one-third the size of conventional septic
tank absorption field systems

Can be placed on irregular or segmented lots

(Typical water use is about 60 gallons per day for
each person in the family.) The standard drain field is
designed for a capacity of 120 gallons per bedroom.
If near capacity, systems may not work. Water
conservation will extend the life of the system and
reduce the chances of system failure.

° Do fix dripping faucets and leaking toilets.
* Do avoid long showers.

¢ Do use washing machines and dishwashers only for
full loads.

* Do not allow the water to run continually when
brushing teeth or while shaving.

* Do avoid disposing of the following items down the
sink drains or toilets: chemicals, sanitary napkins,
tissues, cigarette butts, grease, cooking oil, pesticides,
kitty litter, coffee grounds, disposable diapers,
stockings, or nylons.

* Do not install garbage disposals.

* Do not use septic tank additives or cleaners. They are
unnecessary and some of the chemicals can
contaminate the groundwater.

Do’s and don'ts for outside maintenance:

* Do maintain adequate vegetative cover over the
absorption field.

* Do not allow surface waters to flow over the tank
and drain field areas. (Diversion ditches or subsurface
tiles may be used to direct water away from system.)

* Do not allow heavy equipment, trucks, or
automobiles to drive across any part of the system.

* Do not dig into the absorption field or build
additions near the septic system or the repair area.

Disadvantages

May be slightly more costly to install
Disinfection required for effluent discharge

May not find installers knowledgeable about the system

May be placed in areas with shallow water tables, high
bedrock, or restrictive horizons

Life span of the system is unknown because of its relative
newness

Relatively low maintenance

Table 10.3. Plant-rock Filter System Advantages and Disadvantages

10-8 Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment

Perception of being unsightly to some

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 541: ¢ Do make sure a concrete riser (or manhole) is
installed over the tank if not within 6 inches of the
surface, providing easy access for measuring and
pumping solids. (Note: All tanks should have two
manholes, one positioned over the inlet device and
one over the outlet device.)

There is no need to add any commercial substance to
“start” or clean a tank to keep it operating properly. They
may actually hinder the natural bacterial action that takes
place inside a septic tank. The fecal material, cereal grain,
salt, baking soda, vegetable oil, detergents, and vitamin
supplements that routinely make their way from the
house to the tank are far superior to any additive.

Symptoms of Septic System Problems

These symptoms can mean you have a serious septic sys-
tem problem:

¢ Sewage backup in drains or toilets (often a black liquid
with a disagreeable odor).

° Slow flushing of toilets. Many of the drains will drain
much slower than usual, despite the use of plungers or
drain-cleaning products. This also can be the result of
a clogged plumbing vent or a nonvented fixture.

¢ Surface flow of wastewater. Sometimes liquid seeps
along the surface of the ground near your septic
system. It may or may not have much of an odor and
will range from very clear to black in color.

* Lush green grass over the absorption field, even during
dry weather. Often, this indicates that an excessive
amount of liquid from the system is moving up
through the soil, instead of down, as it should.
Although some upward movement of liquid from the
absorption field is good, too much could indicate
major problems.

¢ The presence of nitrates or bacteria in the drinking
water well indicates that liquid from the system may
be flowing into the well through the ground or over
the surface. Water tests available from the local health
department will indicate whether this is a problem.

°¢ Buildup of aquatic weeds or algae in lakes or ponds
adjacent to your home. This may indicate that
nutrient-rich septic system waste is leaching into the
surface water, which may lead to both inconvenience

and possible health problems.

¢ Unpleasant odors around the house. Often, an
improperly vented plumbing system or a failing septic
system causes a buildup of disagreeable odors.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Table 10.4 is a guide to troubleshooting septic tank
problems.

Septic Tank Inspection

The first priority in the inspection process is the safety of
the homeowner, neighbors, workers, and anyone else for
which the process could create a hazard.

* Do not enter septic tanks or cesspools.
¢ Do not work alone on these tanks.
* Do not bend or lean over septic tanks or cesspools.

¢ Note and take appropriate action regarding unsafe
tank covers.

¢ Note unsanitary conditions or maintenance needs
(sewage backups, odor, seepage).

¢ Do not bring sewage-contaminated clothing into the
home.

¢ Have current tetanus inoculations if working in septic
tank inspection.

Methane and hydrogen sulfide gases are produced in a
septic tank. They are both toxic and explosive. Hydrogen
sulfide gas is quite deceptive. It can have a very strong
odor one moment, but after exposure, the odor may not
be noticed.

Inspection Process

As sewage enters a septic tank, the rate of flow is reduced
and heavy solids settle, forming sludge. Grease and other
light solids rise to the surface, forming a scum. The
sludge and scum (Figure 10.11) are retained and break
down while the clarified effluent (liquid) is discharged to
the absorption field.

Sludge eventually accumulates in the bottom of all septic
tanks. The buildup is slower in warm climates than in
colder climates. The only way to determine the sludge
depth is to measure the sludge with a probe inserted through
an inspection port in the tank’s lid. Do not put this job off until
the tank fills and the toilet overflows. If this happens, damage
to the absorption field could occur and be expensive to repair.

Scum Measurement

The floating scum thickness can be measured with a
probe. The scum thickness and the vertical distance from
the bottom of the scum to the bottom of the inlet can
also be measured. If the bottom of the scum gets within 3
inches of the outlet, scum and grease can enter the
absorption field. If grease gets into the absorption field,
percolation is impaired and the field can fail. If the scum

Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment 10-9



Page 542: Problem

Wastewater backs up into the building
or plumbing fixtures sluggish or do
not drain well.

Wastewater surfaces in the yard.

Sewage odors indoors.

Sewage odors outdoors.

Contaminated drinking water or sur-
face water.

Distribution pipes and soil treatment
system freeze in winter.

Table 10.4. Septic Tank System Troubleshooting

is near the bottom of the tee, the
septic tank needs to be cleaned
out. The scum thickness can best
be measured through the large
inspection port. Scum should
never be closer than 3 inches to
the bottom of the baffle. The scum
thickness is observed by breaking
through it with a probe, usually a
pole.

Possible Cause(s)

Excess water entering the septic tank
system, plumbing installed improperly,
roots clogging the system, plumbing
lines blocked, pump failure, absorption
field damaged or crushed by vehicular
traffic.

Excess water entering the septic tank
system, system blockage, improper
system elevations, undersized soil
treatment system, pump failure,
absorption field damaged or crushed
by vehicular traffic.

Sewage surfacing in yard, improper

plumbing, sewage backing up in the
building, trap under sink dried out,

roof vent pipe frozen shut.

Source other than owner's system,
sewage surfacing in yard, manhole or
inspection pipes damaged or partially
removed, downdraft from vent pipes
on roof.

System too close to a well, water
table, or fractured bedrock; cesspool
or dry well being used; improper well
construction; broken water supply or
wastewater lines. Improperly located
wells must be sealed in strict accor-
dance with state and local codes.

Improper construction, check valve in
lift station not working, heavy equip-
ment traffic compacting soil in area,
low flow rate, lack of use.

Remedies

Fix leaks, stop using garbage disposal,
clean septic tank and inspect pumps,
replace broken pipes, seal pipe con-
nections, avoid planting willow trees
close to system lines. Do not allow
vehicles to drive over or park over
lines. Contact local health department
for guidance.

Fix leaks, clean septic tank and check
pumps, make sure distribution box is
free of debris and functioning prop-
erly, fence off area until problem is
fixed, call in experts. Contact local
health department for guidance.

Repair plumbing, clean septic tank
and check pumps, replace water in
drain pipes, thaw vent pipe. Contact
local health department for guidance.

Clean tank and check pumps, replace
damaged inspection port covers,
replace or repair absorption field.
Contact local health department for
guidance.

Abandon well and locate a new one far
and upslope from the septic system,
fix all broken lines, stop using cess-
pool or drywell. Contact local health
department for guidance.

Examine check valve, keep heavy
equipment such as cars off area,
increase water usage, have friend run
water while away on vacation, operate
septic tank as a holding tank, do not
use antifreeze. Contact local health
department for guidance.

Inspection Pans

From House

Scum

inlet
Ballle

Manhole

To Addiliona! Treatment
andor Dispersal

Outlet
Baffle

Sludge

Figure 10.11. Sludge and Scum in Multicompartment Septic Tank [13]

10-10

Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 543: Sludge Measurement

To measure sludge, make a sludge-measuring stick using a
long pole with at least 3 feet of white cloth (e.g., an old
towel) on the end. Lower the measuring stick into the
tank, behind the outlet baffle to avoid scum particles,
until it touches the tank bottom. It is best to pump each
tank every 2 to 3 years. Annual checking of sludge level is
recommended. The sludge level must never be allowed to
rise within 6 inches of the bottom of the outlet baffle. In
two-compartment tanks, be sure to check both compart-
ments. When a septic tank is pumped, there is no need to
deliberately leave any residual solids. Enough will remain
after pumping to restart the biologic processes.

References

1. University of California Cooperative Extension, Calaveras
County. Septic tanks: the real poop. San Andreas, CA:
University of California Cooperative Extension, Calaveras
County; no date. Available from URL: http://cecalaveras.
ucdavis.edu/realp.htm.

2. University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Residential on-site
wastewater treatment: septic system and drain field
maintenance. Lincoln, NE: University of
Nebraska-Lincoln; 2000. Available from URL: http://
ianrpubs.unl.edu/wastemgt/g1424.htm.

3. Rosenberg CE. The cholera years. Chicago: The University
of Chicago Press; 1962.

4. Salvato J, Nemerow NL, Agardy FJ, editors.
Environmental engineering. 5th ed. New York: John Wiley
and Sons; 2003.

5. Advanced Composting Systems. Phoenix composting
toilet system. Whitefish, MT: Advanced Composting
Systems; no date. Available from URL: http://www.
compostingtoilet.com.

6. BioLet USA, Inc. Composting toilets. Newcomerstown,
OH: BioLet USA, Inc.; no date. Available from URL:

http://www.biolet.com.

7. Mankl K, Slater B. Septic system maintenance. Columbus,
OH: The Ohio State University Extension; no date.
Available from URL: http://ohioline.osu.edu/
aex-fact/0740.html.

8. Hutzler NJ, Waldorf LE, Fancy J. Aerated tanks (aerobic
units). In: Performance of aerobic treatment units.
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin - Madison; no
date. Available from URL: http://www.ci.austin.tx.us/wri/
treat5.htm.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

9. Center for Disease Control. Basic housing inspection.
Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human Services;
1976.

10. Purdue Research Foundation. Environmental education
software series. West Lafayette, IN: Purdue Research
Foundation; 1989. Available from URL: http://

www.inspect-ny.com/septic/trench.gif.

11. North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service. On-site
wastewater treatment websites. Jacksonville, NC: North
Carolina Cooperative Extension Service; 2002. Available
from URL: http://www.ces.ncsu.edu/onslow/staft/
drashash/enved/sepsites.html.

12. Clay Township Regional Waste District. Septic systems.
Indianapolis: Clay Township Regional Waste District;
2004. Available from URL: http://www.ctrwd.org/septics.

hem.

13. Jackson Purchase Resource Conservation and
Development Foundation, Inc. Septic systems: an
overview. Cynthiana, KY: Jackson Purchase Resource
Conservation and Development Foundation, Inc.; no
date. Available from URL: http://www.jpforg/

LRV/septic.htm.

Additional Sources of Information

Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. Science
page, Office of the Associate Administrator for Science.
Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human Services;
no date. Available from URL: http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/
science/.

American Society of Civil Engineers. Available from
URL: http://www.asce.org.

Burks BD, Minnis MM. Onsite wastewater treatment
systems. Madison, WI: Hogarth House, Ltd.; 1994.
Textbook and reference manual on all aspects of on-site
treatment.

International Code Council. International private sewage
disposal code, 2000. Falls Church, VA: International
Code Council; 2000.

National Onsite Wastewater Recycling Association
(NOWRA). Available from URL: http://www.nowra.org
or 1-800-966-2942.

National Small Flows Clearinghouse. Available from
URL: http://www.nesc.wvu.edu/nsfc/nsfc_index.htm or
1-800-624-8301.

US Army Corps of Engineers. Available from URL:
http://www.usace.army.mil.

Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment 10-11



Page 544: 10-12 Chapter 10: On-site Wastewater Treatment Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 545: Chapter 11: Electricity

“To electrize plus or minus, no more needs to be known

than this, that the parts of the tube or sphere that are
rubbed, do, in the instant of the friction, attract the electrical
fire, and therefore take it from the thing rubbing; the same
parts immediately, as the friction upon them ceases, are
disposed to give the fire they have received to any body.”

Benjamin Franklin
Franklins Discovery of the Positive
and Negative States of Electricity, 1747

Introduction

Two basic codes concerned with residential wiring are
important to the housing inspector. The first is the local
electrical code. The purpose of this code is to safeguard
persons as well as buildings and their contents from haz-
ards arising from the use of electricity for light, heat, and
power. The electrical code contains basic minimum provi-
sions considered necessary for safety. Compliance with
this code and proper maintenance will result in an instal-
lation essentially free from hazards, but not necessarily
efficient, convenient, or adequate for good service or
future expansion.

Most local electrical codes are modeled after the National
Electrical Code, published by the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA). Reference to the “code”
in the remainder of this chapter will be to the National
Electrical Code, unless specified otherwise [1].

An electrical installation that was safe and adequate under
the provisions of the electrical code at the time of installa-

tion is not necessarily safe and adequate today. An exam-
ple would be the grounding of a home electrical system.
In the past, electrical systems could be grounded to the
home's plumbing system. Today, many plumbing systems
are no longer constructed of conductive material, but are
made of plastic or polyvinyl chloride-based materials.
Today, the recommendations for grounding a home elec-
trical system are to use two 8-foot by %-inch copper
ground rods. These must be spaced 6 feet apart and be
connected by a continuous (unbroken) piece of copper
wire (the size of this wire corresponds to the size of the
system main). It is also highly recommended that the
system be grounded to the incoming water line if it is
conductive or to the nearest conductive cold water sup-
ply line. Hazards often occur because of overloading wir-
ing systems or usage not in conformity with the code.
This occurs because initial wiring did not provide for
increases in the use of electricity. For this reason, it is rec-
ommended that initial installations be adequate and that
reasonable provisions for system changes be made for
further increases in the use of electricity.

The other code that contains electrical provisions is the
local housing code. It establishes minimum standards for
artificial and natural lighting and ventilation, specifies
the minimum number of electric outlets and lighting fix-
tures per room, and prohibits temporary wiring except
under certain circumstances. In addition, the housing
code usually requires that all components of an electrical
system be installed and maintained in a safe condition to
prevent fire or electric shock.

Definitions of Terms Related to Electricity

Ampere—The unit for measuring intensity of flow of elect

Its symbol is “I.”

Bonding— Applies inert material to metal surfaces to eliminate electrical potential between metal components and

prevent components

Circuit—The flow of electri
to the source.

ty through two or more wires from the suf

nd piping systems from hav ng an elevated voltage potential.

y source to one or more outlets and back

Circuit breaker—A safety device used to break the flow of electricity by opening the circuit automatically in the

event of overloading or used to open or close the circuit manually.

Conductor—

¢ A bare conductor is one with no insulation or covering.

y substance capable of conveying an electric current. In the home, co

r wire is usually used.

ON covered conductor is one covered with one or more layers of insulation.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Chapter 11: Electricity = 11-1



Page 546: Flow of Electric Current This high-transmission voltage is stepped down (reduced)

to normal 115/230-volt household current by a transformer
located near the point of use (residence). The electricity is
then transmitted to the house by a series of wires called a
service drop. In areas where the electric wiring is underground,
the wires leading to the building are buried in the ground.

Electricity is usually created by a generator that converts
mechanical energy into electrical energy. The electricity
may be the result of water, steam, or wind powering or
turning a generator. The electricity is then run through a
transformer, where voltage is increased to several hundred
thousand volts and, in some instances, to a million or For electric current to flow, it must travel from a higher
more volts. This high voltage is necessary to increase the to a lower potential voltage. In an electrical system, the
efficiency of power transmission over long distances. hot wires (black or red) are at a higher potential than are
the neutral or ground wire (white or green).

Conductor gauge—A numeric system used to label electric conductor sizes, given in American Wire Gauge (AWG). The
larger the AWG number, the smaller the wire size.

Current—The flow of electricity through a circuit.

¢ Alternating current is an electric current that reverses its direction of flow at regular intervals. For example, it would
alternate 60 times every second in a 60-cycle system. This type of power is commonly found in homes.

* Direct current is an electric current flowing in one direction. This type of current is not commonly found in today’s homes.

Electricity—Energy that can be used to run household appliances; it can produce light and heat, shocks, and numerous other
effects.

Fuse—A safety device that cuts off the flow of electricity when the current flowing through the fuse exceeds its rated capacity.

Ground—To connect with the earth, as to ground an electric wire directly to the earth or indirectly through a water pipe or
some other conductor. Usually, a green-colored wire is used for grounding the whole electrical system to the earth. A copper
wire is usually used to ground individual electrical components of the whole system. (The home inspector should never as-
sume that insulation color wiring codes have been used appropriately.)

Ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI)—A device intended to protect people from electric shock. It de-energizes a circuit
or portion of a circuit within an established very brief period of time when a current to ground exceeds some predetermined
value (less than that required to operate the over-current protected device of the supply circuit).

Hot wires—Those that carry the electric current or power to the load; they are usually black or red.
Insulator—A material that will not permit the passage of electricity.

Kilowatt-hour (KWH)—The amount of energy supplied by one kilowatt (1,000 watts) for 1 hour (3,600 seconds), equal to
3,600,000 joule. Electric bills are usually figured by the number of KWHs consumed.

Neutral wire—The third wire in a three-wire distribution circuit; it is usually white or light gray and is connected to the ground.

Resistance—A measure of the difficulty of electric current to pass through a given material; its unit is the ohm.

Service—The conductor and equipment for delivering energy from the electricity supply system to the wiring system of the
premises.

Service drop—The overhead service connectors from the last pole or other aerial support to and including the splices, if any,
connecting to the service entrance conductors at the building or other structure.

Service panel— Main panel or cabinet through which electricity is brought to the building and distributed. It contains the
main disconnect switch and fuses or circuit breakers.

Short circuit—A break in the flow of electricity through a circuit due to the load caused by improper connection between
hot and neutral wires.

Volt—The unit for measuring electrical pressure of force, which is known as electromotive force. Its symbol is “E.”
Voltage drop—A voltage loss when wires carry current. The longer the cord, the greater the voltage drop.

Watt—The unit of electric power. Volts times amperes = watts.

11-2. Chapter 11: Electricity Healthy Housing Reference Manual




Page 547: Voltage is a measure of the force at which electricity is
delivered. It is similar to pressure in a water supply
system.

Current is measured in amperes and is the quantity of
flow of electricity. It is similar to measuring water in gal-
lons per second. A watt is equal to volts times amperes. It
is a measure of how much power is flowing. Electricity is
sold in quantities of kilowatt-hours.

The earth, by virtue of moisture contained within the
soil, serves as a very effective conductor. Therefore, in
power transmission, instead of having both the hot and
neutral wires carried by the transmission poles, one lead
of the generator is connected to the ground, which serves
as a conductor (Figure 11.1). All electrical utility wires are
carried by the transmission towers and are considered hot
or charged. At the house, or point where the electricity is
to be used, the circuit is completed by another connec-
tion to ground.

The electric power utility provides a ground somewhere
in its local distribution system; therefore, there is a
ground wire in addition to the hot wires within the ser-
vice drop. In Figure 11.1 this ground can be seen at the
power pole that contains the step-down transformer.

In addition to the ground connection provided by the
electric utility, every building is required to have an inde-
pendent ground called a system ground. The system
ground is a connection to ground from one of the cur-
rent-carrying conductors of the electrical system. System
grounding, applied to limit overvoltages in the event of a
fault, provides personnel safety, provides a positive means
of detecting and isolating ground faults, and improves
service reliability. Therefore, the system ground’s main
purpose is to protect the electrical system itself and offers
limited protection to the user.

The system ground serves the same purpose as the power
company’s ground; however, it has a lower resistance
because it is closer to the building. The equipment
ground protects people from potential harm during the

POWER GROUND WIRE

STEP-UP
TRANSMISSION LINES

TRANSFORMER

GENERATOR SERVICE

RouNo GROUND

Figure 11.1. Utility Overview [2]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

use of certain electrical equipment. The system ground
should be a continuous wire of low resistance and of suf-
ficient size to conduct current safely from lightning and
overloads.

Electric Service Entrance

Service Drop

To prevent accidental contact by people, the entrance head
(Figure 11.2) should be attached to the building at least
10 feet above ground. The conductor should clear all roofs
by at least 8 feet and residential driveways by 12 feet. For
public streets, alleys, roads, and driveways on other than
residential property, the clearance must be 18 feet.

The wires or conductor should be of sufficient size to
carry the load and not smaller than No. 8 copper wire or
equivalent.

For connecting wire from the entrance head to the service
drop wires, the code requires that the service entrance
conductors be installed either below the level of the ser-
vice head or below the termination of the service entrance
cable sheath. Drip loops must be formed on individual
conductors. This will prevent water from entering the
electric service system. The wires that form the entrance
cable should extend 36 inches from the entrance head to
provide a sufficient length to connect service drop wires
to the building with insulators. The entrance cable may
be a special type of armored outdoor cable, or it may be
enclosed in a conduit. The electric power meter may be
located either inside or outside the building. In either
instance, the meter must be located before the main
power disconnect.

Figure 11.2. Entrance Head

11-3

Chapter 11: Electricity



Page 548: Figure 11.3 shows an armored cable service entrance with
a fuse system. Newer construction will have circuit break-
ers, as shown in Figure 11.4. The armored cable is
anchored to the building with metal straps spaced every 4
feet. The cable is run down the wall and through a hole
drilled through the building. The cable is then connected
to the service panel, which should be located within 1
foot of where the cable enters the building. The ground
wire need not be insulated. This ground wire may be
either solid or stranded copper, or a material with an
equivalent resistance.

Figure 11.5 shows the use of thin-wall conduit in a ser-
vice entrance.

Underground Service
When wires are run underground, they must be protected
from moisture and physical damage. The opening in the

ne

METAL
STRAP

WATERTIGHT
CONNECTOR J

NON-
WATERTIGHT EY
CONNECTOR

NEUTRAL WIRE
RED WIRE
BLACK WIRE

(240-VOLT CIRCUIT)

Figure 11.3. Armored Cable Service Entrance [2]

ON
TRIPPED

OFF a
~~ RESET

Figure 11.4. Breakers [2]

11-4 Chapter 11: Electricity

building foundation where the underground service
enters the building must be moisture proof. Refer to local
codes for information about allowable materials for this
type of service entrance.

Electric Meter

The electric meter (Figure 11.6) may be located inside or
outside the building. The meter itself is weatherproof and
is plugged into a weatherproof socket. The electric power
company furnishes the meter; the socket may or may not
be furnished by the power company.

Grounding

The system ground consists of grounding the neutral
incoming wire and the neutral wire of the branch circuits.
The equipment ground consists of grounding the metal
parts of the service entrance, such as the service switch, as
well as the service entrance conduit, armor or cable.

METER

CONDUIT
ADAPTER

SERVICE PANEL |

CONDUIT
CONNECTOR

Figure 11.5. Thin-wall Conduit [2]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 549: Poor grounding at any point can result in a person pro-
viding a more effective route to ground than the intended
ground, resulting in electrocution. This can occur from
damaged insulation allowing electricity to flow into the
case or cabinet of the appliance.

The system must be grounded by two 8 foot by 5/8-inch
copper ground rods of at least 8 feet in length driven into
the ground and connected by a continuous (unbroken)
piece of copper wire (the size of this wire corresponds to
the size of the system main). It is highly recommended
that the system also be grounded to the incoming water
line or nearest cold water supply line if it is metal.

The usual ground connection is to a conductive water
pipe of the city water system. The connection should be
made to the street side of the water meter, as shown in
Figure 11.7. If the water meter is located near the street
curb, then the ground connection should be made to the
cold water pipe as close as possible to where it enters the
building. It is not unusual for a water meter to be
removed from the building for service. If the ground con-
nection is made at a point in the water piping system on
the building side of the water meter, the ground circuit
will be broken on removal of the meter. This broken
ground circuit is a shock hazard if both sides of the water
meter connections are touched simultaneously. Local or
state codes should be checked to determine compliance
with correct grounding protocols.

In increasing instances, the connections between the
water meters and pipes are electrically very poor. In this
case, if the ground connection is made on the building
side of the water meter, there may not be an effective
ground. To prevent the two aforementioned situations,
the code requires effective bonding by a properly sized
jumper-wire around any equipment that is likely to be
disconnected for repairs or replacement.

Often, the house ground will be disconnected. Therefore,
the housing inspector should always check the house
ground to see if it is properly connected.

Figure 11.6. Electric Meter

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Figure 11.8 shows a typical grounding scheme at the ser-
vice box of a residence. In this figure, only the grounded
neutral wires are shown. The neutral strap is a conductive
bare metal strip that is riveted directly to the service box.
This conductive strip forms a collective ground that joins
the ground wires from the service entrance, branch cir-
cuits, and house ground.

Follow these key grounding points:
¢ Use two metal rods driven 8 feet into the ground.

¢ Bond around water heaters and filters to assure
grounding.

¢ If water pipes are used, they must be supplemented
with a second ground.

¢ Ground rod must be driven to full depth.

¢ If ground rod resistance exceeds 25 ohms, install two
rods at a minimum of 6 feet apart.

¢ When properly grounded, the metal frame of a
building can be used as a ground point.

* Do not use underground gas lines as a ground.

* Provide external grounds to other systems such as
satellite, telephone, and other services to further
protect the electrical system from surges.

¢ Ifthe water service pipes to the home are not metal or
if all of the service components in the home are not
metal, then the water system cannot play a role in
grounding.

BRANCH
CIRCUITS

RANGE
OUTLET

Figure 11.7. Typical Service Entrance [2]

Chapter 11: Electricity 11-5



Page 550: NEUTRAL

ig CONDUIT

TO BRANCH
CIRCUITS

SERVICE
CONDUIT

LOCKNUT

GROUNDING
BUSHING

GROUNDING CONDUIT

~—GROUND WIRE

Figure 11.8. Grounding Scheme [2]

Bonding is necessary to provide a route for electricity to
flow around isolated elements of a piping system to
ensure electrical potential is minimized for both the pro-
tection of the system from corrosion and to protect indi-
viduals from electrical shock.

Two- or Three-wire Electric Services

One of the wires in every electrical service installation is
supposed to be grounded. This neutral wire should always
be white. The hot wires are usually black, red, or some
other color, but never white.

The potential difference or voltage between the hot wires
and the ground or neutral wire of a normal residential
electrical system is 115 volts. Thus, where there is a
two-wire installation (one hot and one neutral), only 115
volts are available.

When three wires are installed (two hot and one neutral),
either 115 or 230 volts are available. In a three-wire
system, the voltage between the neutral and either of the
hot wires is 115 volts; between the two hot wires, it is
230 (Figure 11.9). The major advantage of a three-wire
system is that it permits the operation of heavy electrical
equipment such as clothes dryers, cooking ranges, and air
conditioners, the majority of which require 230-volt
circuits. In addition, the three-wire system is split at the
service panel into two 115-volt systems to supply power
for small appliances and electric lights. The result is a
doubling of the number of circuits, and, possibly, a
corresponding increase in the number of branch circuits,
with a reduction in the probability of fire caused by
overloading electrical circuits if the electrical demands
exceed the capacity.

11-6 Chapter 11: Electricity

Residential Wiring Adequacy

The use of electricity in the home has risen sharply since
the 1930s. Many homeowners have failed to repair or
improve their wiring to keep it safe and up to date. In the
1970s, the code recommended that the main distribution
panel in a home be a minimum of 100 amps. Because the
number of appliances that use electricity has continued to
grow, so has the size of recommended panels. For a nor-
mal house (2,500 to 3,500 square feet), a 200-amp panel
is recommended. The panel must be of the breaker type
with a main breaker for the entire system (Figure 11.4).
Fuse boxes are not recommended for new housing.

This type of service is sufficient in a one-family house or
dwelling unit to provide safe and adequate electricity for
the lighting, refrigerator, iron, and an 8,000-watt cooking
range, plus other appliances requiring a total of up to
10,000 watts.

Some older homes have a 60-ampere, three-wire service
(Figure 11.10). It is recommended that these homes be
rewired for at least the minimum of 200-amperes recom-
mended in the code. The 60-amp service is safely capable
of supplying current for only lighting and portable appli-
ances, such as a cooking range and regular dryer (4,500
watts), or an electric hot water heater (2,500 watts), and
cannot handle additional major appliances. Other older
homes today have only a 30-ampere, 115-volt, two-wire
service (Figure 11.11). This system can safely handle only
a limited amount of lighting, a few minor appliances, and
no major appliances. Therefore, this size service is sub-
standard in terms of the modern household’s needs for
electricity. Furthermore, it is a fire hazard and a threat to
the safety of the home and the occupants.

Wire Sizes and Types

Aluminum wiring, used in some homes from the mid
1960s to the early 1970s, is a potential fire hazard [3].
According to the U.S. Consumer Product Safety
Commission (CPSC), fires and even deaths have been
caused by this hazard. Problems due to expansion can
cause overheating at connections between the wire and
devices (switches and outlets) or at splices. CPSC research

3-WIRE

SOURCE 230 VOLTS

GROUND
=>} ___ CONNECTION

Figure 11.9. Grounding [2]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 551: shows that homes wired with aluminum wire manufac-
tured before 1972 are 55 times more likely to have one or
more connections reach fire hazard conditions than are
homes wired with copper. Post-1972 aluminum wire is
also a concern. Introduction of aluminum wire alloys
around 1972 did not solve most of the connection failure
problems. Aluminum wiring is still permitted and used
for certain applications, including residential service
entrance wiring and single-purpose higher amperage cir-
cuits such as 240-volt air conditioning or electric range
circuits.

Reducing Risk

Only two remedies for aluminum wiring have been rec-
ommended by the CPSC: discontinued use of the alumi-
num circuit or the less costly option of adding copper
connecting “pigtail” wires between the aluminum wire
and the wired device (receptacle, switch, or other device).
The pigtail connection must be made using only a special
connector and special crimping tool licensed by the AMP
Corporation. Emergency temporary repairs necessary to

<> MAIN SERVICE
INTO HOUSE

ELECTRIC METER
PANEL BOX

ELECTRIC METER

METER SEAL

CONDUIT BETWEEN
EQUIPMENT ON
SERVICE PANEL

MAIN DISCONNECT

MAIN FUSE
MAIN FUSE BOX

BRANCH CIRCUIT FUSE

BRANCH CIRCUIT WIRE

BRANCH CIRCUIT
FUSE BOX

GROUND CONNECTION
ON STREET SIOE
OF WATER METER

10 WATI® MAIN

_, MAIN WALER
SMUT OEP VALVE

Figure 11.10. Three-wire Service [2]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

keep an essential circuit in service might be possible fol-
lowing other procedures described by the CPSC, and in
accordance with local electrical codes [4,5].

Wire Sizes

Electric power actually flows along the surface of the
wire. It flows with relative ease (little resistance) in some
materials, such as copper and aluminum, and with a sub-
stantial amount of resistance in iron. If iron wire were
used, it would have to be 10 times as large as copper wire
to be as effective in conducting electricity. In fine elec-
tronics, gold is the preferred conductor because of the
resistance to corrosion and the very high conductivity.

Electricity is the movement of electrons from an area of
higher potential to one of lower potential. An analogy to
how electricity flows would be the flow of water along the
path of least resistance or down a hill. All it takes to cre-
ate the potential for electricity is the collection of elec-
trons and a pathway for them to flow to an area of lesser
concentration along a conductor. When a person walks
across a nylon carpet in times of low atmospheric humid-
ity, his or her body will often collect electrons and serve
as a capacitor (a storage container for electrons). When
that person nears a grounding source, the electrons will
often jump from a finger to the ground, creating a spark
and small shock.

MAIN SERVICE
“F INTO HOUSE

WIRES

ELECTRIC METER
PANEL BOX

ELECTRIC METER

METER SEAL

CONDUIT BETWEEN
EQUIPMENT ON

SERVICE PANEL

MAIN DISCONNECT
MAIN CIRCUIT BREAKERS

MAIN CIRCUIT BREAKER
PANEL BOX

BRANCH CIRCUIT
CIRCUIT BREAKER BOX
BRANCH CIRCUIT
BRANCH CIRCUIT
CIRCUIT BREAKER

GROUND CONNECTION
ON STREET SIDE
OF WATER METER

WATER METER

= TO WATER MAIN

MAIN WATER
SHUT OFF VALVE

Figure 11.11. Two-wire Service [2]

Chapter 11: Electricity 11-7



Page 552: Maximum Current Recommended for AWG Wire Size
#8

Size wire (AWG) (larger wire, smaller number) #14

Maximum capacity in amperes

#12

#10

A number preceded by the letters AWG (American Wire
Gauge) indicates copper wire sizes [6]. As the AWG
number of the wire becomes smaller, the size and current
capacity of the wire increases. AWG 14 is most
commonly found in older residential branch circuits.
AWG 14 wires should be used only in a branch circuit
with a 15-ampere capacity or no more than a 1,500-watt
demand. Wire sizes AWG 16, 18, and 20 are
progressively smaller than AWG 14 and are used for
extension wires or low-voltage systems. Wire of the
correct size must be used for two reasons: current capacity
and voltage drop or loss.

When current flows through a wire, it creates heat. The
greater the amount of flow, the greater the amount of
heat generated. (Doubling the amperes without changing
the wire size increases the amount of heat by four times.)
The heat is electric energy (electrons) that has been
converted into heat energy by the resistance of the wire.
The heat created by the coils in a toaster is an example of
designed resistance to create heat. Most heat developed by
an electrical conductor is wasted; therefore, the electric
energy used to generate it is also wasted.

If the amount of heat generated by the flow of current
through a wire becomes excessive, a fire may result.
Therefore, the code sets the maximum permissible
current that may flow through a certain type and size
wire. The blue box provides examples of current
capacities for copper wire of various sizes.

In addition to heat generation, there will be a reduction in
voltage as a result of attempting to force more current
through a wire than it is designed to carry. Certain
appliances, such as induction-type electric motors, may be
damaged if operated at too low a voltage.

Wire Types

All wires must be marked to indicate the maximum
working voltage, the proper type letter or letters for the
type wire specified in the code, the manufacturer's name
or trademark, and the AWG size or circular-mil area
(Figure 11.12). A variety of wire types can be used for a
wide range of temperature and moisture conditions. The
code should be consulted to determine the proper wire
for specific conditions.

11-8 Chapter 11: Electricity

Types of Cable

Nonmetallic sheathed cable consists of wires wrapped in
plastic and then a paper layer, followed by another spiral
layer of paper, and enclosed in a fabric braid, which is
treated with moisture- and fire-resistant compounds.
Figure 11.12 shows this type of cable, which often is
marketed under the name Romex. This type of cable can
be used only indoors and in permanently dry locations.
Romex-type wiring is normally used in residential
construction. However, when cost permits, it is recom-
mended that a conduit-based system be used.

Armored cable is commonly known as BX or Flexsteel
trade names. Wires are wrapped in a tough paper and
covered with a strong spiral flexible steel armor. This
type of cable is shown in Figure 11.13 and may be used
only in permanently dry indoor locations. Armored cable
must be supported by a strap or staple every 6 feet and
within 24 inches of every switch or junction box, except
for concealed runs in old work where it is impossible to
mount straps.

Cables are also available with other outer coatings of met-
als, such as copper, bronze, and aluminum for use in a
variety of conditions.

Flexible Cords

CPSC estimates that about 4,000 injuries associated with
electric extension cords are treated in hospital emergency
rooms each year. About half of the injuries involve
fractures, lacerations, contusions, or sprains from people
tripping over extension cords. Thirteen percent of the
injuries involve children younger than 5 years of age;
electrical burns to the mouth account for half the injuries
to young children [7].

Figure 11.12. Wire Markings [2]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 553: Figure 11.13. Armored Cable [2]

CPSC also estimates that about 3,300 residential fires
originate in extension cords each year, killing 50 people
and injuring about 270 others [7]. The most frequent
causes of such fires are short circuits, overloading the sys-
tem, and damage to or misuse of extension cords.

The Problem

Following are CPSC investigations of injuries that illus-
trate the major injury patterns associated with extension
cords: children putting extension cords in their mouths,
overloaded cords, worn or damaged cords, and tripping
over cords:

¢ A 15-month-old girl put an extension cord in her
mouth and suffered an electrical burn. She required
surgery.

Two young children were injured in a fire caused by an
overloaded extension cord in their family’s home. A
lamp, TV set, and electric heater had been plugged
into a single, light-duty extension cord.

A 65-year-old woman was treated for a fractured ankle
after tripping over an extension cord.

The Standards

The code says that many cord-connected appliances
should be equipped with polarized grounding plugs.
Polarized plugs can only be inserted one way into the
outlet because one blade is slightly wider than the other.
Polarization and grounding ensure that certain parts of
appliances that could have a higher risk of electric shock
when they become live are instead connected to the neu-
tral, or grounded, side of the circuit. Such electrical prod-
ucts should only be used with polarized or grounded
extension cords.

Voluntary industry safety standards, including those of
Underwriter’s Laboratory (UL), now require that general-
use extension cords have safety closures, warning labels,
rating information about the electrical current, and other
features for the protection of children and other
consumers.

In addition, UL-listed extension cords now must be con-
structed with 16-gauge or larger wire or be equipped with
integral fuses. The 16-gauge wire is rated to carry 13
amperes (up to 1,560 watts), as compared with the for-

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

merly used 18-gauge cords that were rated for 10 amperes
(up to 1,200 watts).

Safety Suggestions

The following are CPSC recommendations [7] for
purchasing and safely using extension cords:

Use extension cords only when necessary and only on
a temporary basis.

Use polarized extension cords with polarize appliances.

Make sure cords do not dangle from the counter or
tabletops where they can be pulled down or tripped
over.

Replace cracked or worn extension cords with new
16-gauge cords that have the listing of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, safety closures, and other
safety features.

With cords lacking safety closures, cover any unused
outlets with electrical tape or with plastic caps to
prevent the chance of a child making contact with the
live circuit.

Insert plugs fully so that no part of the prongs is
exposed when an extension cord is in use.

¢ When disconnecting cords, pull the plug rather than
the cord itself.

Teach children not to play with plugs and outlets.

Use only three-wire extension cords for appliances
with three-prong plugs. Never remove the third (round
or U-shaped) prong, which is a safety feature designed

to reduce the risk for shock and electrocution.

In locations where furniture or beds may be pushed
against an extension cord where the cord joins the
plug, use a special angle extension cord specifically
designed for use in these instances.

Check the plug and the body of the extension cord
while the cord is in use. Noticeable warming of these
plastic parts is expected when cords are being used at
their maximum rating. If the cord feels hot or if there
is a softening of the plastic, this is a warning that the
plug wires or connections are failing and that the
extension cord should be discarded and replaced.

Never use an extension cord while it is coiled or
looped. Never cover any part of an extension cord with
newspapers, clothing, rugs, or any objects while the
cord is in use. Never place an extension cord where it
is likely to be damaged by heavy furniture or foot
traffic.

Chapter 11: Electricity 11-9



Page 554: * Do not use staples or nails to attach extension cords to
a baseboard or to another surface. This could damage
the cord and present a shock or fire hazard.

* Do not overload extension cords by plugging in
appliances that draw a total of more watts than the
rating of the cord.

° Use special heavy-duty extension cords for high-
wattage appliances such as air conditioners, portable
electric heaters, and freezers.

¢ When using outdoor tools and appliances, use only
extension cords labeled for outdoor use.

Wiring

Open Wiring

Open wiring is a wiring method using knobs, nonmetal-
lic tubes, cleats, and flexible tubing for the protection and
support of insulated conductors in or on buildings and
not concealed by the structure. The term “open wiring”
does not mean exposed, bare wiring. In dry locations,
when not exposed to severe physical damage, conductors
may be separately encased in flexible tubing. Tubing
should be in continuous lengths not exceeding 15 feet
and secured to the surface by straps not more than 442
feet apart. Tubing should be separated from other con-
ductors by at least 2% inches and should have a perma-
nently maintained airspace between them and any and all
pipes they cross.

Concealed Knob and Tube Wiring

Concealed knob and tube wiring is a wiring method
using knobs, tubes, and flexible nonmetallic tubing for
the protection and support of insulated wires concealed
in hollow spaces of walls and ceilings of buildings. This
wiring method is similar to open wiring and, like open
wiring, is usually found only in older buildings.

Electric Service Panel

The service switch is a main switch that will disconnect
the entire electrical system at one time. The main fuses or
circuit breakers are usually located within the service
switch box. The branch circuit fuse or circuit breaker may
also be located within this box.

According to the code, the switch must be externally
operable. This condition is fulfilled if the switch can be
operated without the operator being exposed to electri-
cally active parts. Figure 11.14 shows a 200-amp service
box. Figure 11.15 shows an external “hinged switch”
power shutoff installed on the outside of a home.

11-10 Chapter 11: Electricity

Most of today’s older
homes do not have
hinged switches.
Instead, the main fuse
is mounted on a small
insulated block that
can be pulled out of
the switch. When this
block is removed, the
circuit is broken.

In some installations,
the service switch is a
“solid neutral” switch,
meaning that the
switch or a fuse does
not break the neutral wire in the switch.

Figure 11.14. 200-Amp Service Box

When circuit breakers are used in homes instead of fuses,
main circuit breakers may or may not be required. If it
takes more than six movements of the hand to open all
the branch-circuit breakers, a main breaker, switch, or
fuse will be required ahead of the branch-circuit breakers.
Thus, a house with seven or more branch circuits requires
a separate disconnect means or a main circuit breaker
ahead of the branch-circuit breakers.

Over-current Devices

The amperage (current flow) in any wire is limited to the
maximum permitted by using an over-current device of a
size specified by the code. Four types of over-current
devices are common: circuit breakers, ground fault circuit
interrupters (GFCIs), arc fault circuit interrupters
(AFCIs), and fuses. The over-current device of a specific
size is specified by the code. The over-current device must
be rated at equal or lower capacity than the wire of the
circuit it protects.

Figure 11.15. External Power Shutoff and Meter

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 555: Circuit Breakers (Fuseless Service Panels)

A circuit breaker looks something like an ordinary electric
light switch. Figure 11.14 shows the service box in a 200-
amp fuseless system. Figure 11.15 shows a service switch.
There is a handle that may be used to turn power on or
off. Inside is a simple mechanism that, in case of a circuit
overload, trips the switch and breaks the circuit. The cir-
cuit breaker may be reset by turning the switch to off and
then simply resetting the switch to the on position. A cir-
cuit breaker is capable of taking harmless short-period
overloads (such as the heavy initial current required in the
starting of a washing machine or air conditioner) without
tripping, but protects against prolonged overloads. After
the cause of trouble has been located and corrected,
power is easily restored. Fuseless service panels or breaker
boxes are usually broken up into the following circuits:

¢ A 100-ampere or larger main circuit breaker that
shuts off all power.

A 40-ampere circuit for an appliance such as an
electric cooking range.

A 30-ampere circuit for a clothes dryer, water heater,
heat pump, or central air conditioning.

A 20-ampere circuit for small appliances and power
tools.

A 15-ampere circuit for general-purpose lighting,
TVs, VCRs, computers, and vacuum cleaners.

Space for new circuits to be added if needed for
future use.

Ground Fault Circuit Interrupters

Unlike circuit breakers and fuses, GFCIs are installed to
protect the user from electrocution. These devices provide
protection against electrical shock and electrocution from
ground faults or contact with live parts by a grounded
individual. They constantly monitor electrical currents
flowing into a product. If the electricity flowing through
the product differs even slightly from that returning, the
GFCI will quickly shut off the current. GFCIs detect
amounts of electricity much smaller than those required
for a fuse or circuit breaker to activate and shut off the
circuit. UL lists three types of GFCIs designed for home
use that are readily available and fairly inexpensive and
simple to install:

° Wall Receptacle GFCI—This type of GFCI (Figure
11.16) is used in place of a standard receptacle found
throughout the house. It fits into a standard outlet box
and protects against ground faults whenever an
electrical product is plugged into the outlet. If

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

strategically located, it will also
provide protection to
downstream receptacles.

Circuit Breaker GFCI—In
homes equipped with circuit
breakers, this type of GFCI may
be installed in a panel box to
protect selected circuits. A circuit
breaker GFCI serves a dual
purpose: it shuts off electricity in
the event of a ground fault and
will also trip when a short circuit
or an overload occurs.

Portable GFCI—A portable GFCI requires no special
knowledge or equipment to install. One type contains
the GFCI circuitry in a self-contained enclosure with
plug blades in the back and receptacle slots in the
front. It can be plugged into a receptacle, and the
electrical product plugged into the GFCI. Another
type of portable GFCI is an extension cord combined
with a GFCI. It adds flexibility in using receptacles
that are not protected by GFCIs.

Figure 11.16. GFCI

Once a GFCI is installed, it must be checked monthly to
determine that it is operating properly. Pressing the test
button can check units; the GFCI should disconnect the
power to that outlet. Pressing the reset button reconnects
the power. If the GFCI does not disconnect the power,
have it checked by a qualified, certified electrician.

GFCIs should be installed on circuits in the following
areas: garages, bathrooms, kitchens, crawl spaces, unfin-
ished basements, hot tubs and spas, pool electronics, and
exterior outlets. However, they are not required on single
outlets that serve major appliances.

Arc-fault Circuit Interrupters

Arc-fault circuit interrupters are new devices intended to
provide fire protection by opening the circuit if an arcing
fault is detected. An arcing fault is an electric spark or hot
plasma field that extends from the hot wire to a ground.
An arc is a luminous discharge of electricity across an
insulating medium or simply a spark across an air gap.
Arcs occur every day in homes. For example, an arc
occurs inside the switch when a light is turned on. Toy
racecars and trains create arcs. The motors inside hair
dyers and power drills have tiny arcs. All of these are con-
trolled arcs. It is the uncontrolled or nondesigned arc that
is a serious fire hazard in the home. The arc-fault circuit
interrupter looks like the GFCI unit (Figure 11.17), but
it is not designed to protect against electric shock.

Chapter 11: Electricity 11-11



Page 556: Because most electrical wiring
in a home is hidden from view,
many arc faults go undetected
and continue arcing indefi-
nitely. If left in this arcing
state, the potential for fire
increases. It is estimated that
about one third of fires are
caused by arcing faults. Normal
fuses and circuit breakers are not capable of detecting arc
faults and therefore will not open the circuit and stop the
flow of electricity.

Figure 11.17. Arc Interrupter

Fused Ampere Service Panel (Fuse Box)

Fuse-type panel boxes are generally found in older homes.
They are as safe and adequate as a circuit breaker of equiv-
alent capacity, provided fuses of the proper size are used.

A fuse, like a circuit breaker, is designed to protect a cir-
cuit against overloading and short circuits and does so in
two ways.

When a fuse is blown by a short circuit, the metal strip is
instantly heated to an extremely high temperature, and
this heat causes it to vaporize. A fuse blown by a short
circuit may be easily recognized because the window of
the fuse usually becomes discolored.

In a fuse blown by an overload, the metal strip is melted
at its weakest point, breaking the flow of current to the
load. In this case, the window of the fuse remains clear;
therefore, a blown fuse caused by an overload may also be
easily recognized.

Sometimes, although a fuse has not been blown, the bot-
tom of the fuse may be severely discolored and pitted.
This indicates a loose connection because the fuse was
not screwed in properly.

It is critical to check that all fuses are properly rated for
the designed amperage. The placing of a fuse with a
higher amperage than recommended presents a significant
fire hazard.

Generally, all fused panel boxes are wired similarly for
two- and three-wire systems. In a two-wire-circuit panel
box, the black or red hot wire is connected to a terminal
of the main disconnect, and the white or light gray
neutral wire is connected to the neutral strip, which is then
grounded to the pipe on the street side of the water meter.

In a three-wire system, the black and red hot wires are
connected to separate terminals of the main disconnect,

11-12. Chapter 11: Electricity

and the neutral wire is grounded the same as for a
two-wire system. Below each fuse is a terminal to which a
black or red wire is connected. The white or light gray
neutral wires are then connected to the neutral strip.
Each fuse indicates a separate circuit (Figure 11.18).

¢ Nontamperable fuses—All ordinary plug fuses have
the same diameter and physical appearance, regardless
of their current capacity, whereas nontamperable fuses
are sized by amperage load. Thus, with regular fuses, if
a circuit designed for a 15-ampere fuse is overloaded so
that the 15-ampere fuse blows out, nothing will
prevent a person from replacing the 15-ampere fuse
with a 20- or 30-ampere fuse, which may not blow
out. If a circuit wired with 14-gauge wire (current
capacity 15 amperes) is fused with a 20- or 30-ampere
fuse and an overload develops, more current than the
14-gauge wire is safely capable of carrying could pass
through the circuit. The result would be a heating of
the wire and potential fire.

° Type-S fuses—Type-S fuses have different lengths and
diameter threads for each amperage capacity. An
adapter is first inserted into the ordinary fuse holder,
which adapts the fuse holder for only one capacity
fuse. Once the adapter is inserted, it cannot be
removed.

° Cartridge fuses—A cartridge fuse protects an electric
circuit in the same manner as an ordinary plug fuse,
already described, protects an electric circuit. Cartridge
fuses are often used as main fuses.

eum um

SY a,
SS = <M
\=,

Plug fuses are not made in ratings

A typical Type-S non-tamperable fuse, and its
over 30 amp.

adapter, Once an adapter has been screwed into
a fuse-holder, it cannot be removed. This prevents
use of fuses larger than originally intended.

Qo)

Cartridge fuses rated 60 amps.
or less are of the ferrule type
shown.

Cartridge finses tated more phan
60 amp, have knife-blade terminals
shown

Figure 11.18. Types of Fuses

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 557: Electric Circuits

An electric circuit in good repair carries electricity
through two or three wires from the source of supply to
an outlet and back to the source. A branch circuit is an
electric circuit that supplies current to a limited number
of outlets and fixtures. A residence generally has many
branch circuits. Each is protected against short circuits
and overloads by a 15- or 20-ampere fuse or circuit
breaker.

The number of outlets per branch circuit varies from
building to building. The code requires enough light cir-
cuits so that 3 watts of power will be available for each
square foot of floor area in a house. A circuit wired with
14-gauge wire and protected by a 15 ampere over-current
protection device provides 15x115 (1,725 watts); each
circuit is enough for 1,725 divided by 3 (575 square
feet). Note that 575 is a minimum figure; if future use is
considered, 500 or even 400 square feet per branch cir-
cuit should be used.

Special appliance circuits will provide electric power for
lighting, radio, TV, and small portable appliances.
However, the larger electric appliances usually found in
the kitchen consume more power and must have their
own special circuit.

Section 220-3b of the code requires two special circuits to
serve only appliance outlets in the kitchen, laundry, pan-
try, family room, dining room, and breakfast room. Both
circuits must be extended to the kitchen; either one or
both of these circuits may serve the other rooms. No light-
ing outlets may be connected to these circuits, and they
must be wired with 12-gauge wire and protected by a
20-ampere over-current device. Each circuit will have a
capacity of 20x115 (2,300 watts), which is not too much
when toasters often require more than 1,600 watts.

It is customary to provide a circuit for each of the follow-
ing appliances: range, water heater, washing machine,
clothes dryer, garbage disposal, dishwasher, furnace, water
pump, air conditioner, heat pump, and air compressor.
These circuits may be either 115 volts or 230 volts,
depending on the particular appliance or motor installed.

Outlet Switches and Junction Boxes

The code requires that every switch, outlet, and joint in
wire or cable be housed in a box. Every fixture must be
mounted on a box. Most boxes are made of plastic or
metal with a galvanized coating. When a cable of any
style is used for wiring, the code requires that it be
securely anchored with a connector to each box it enters.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Grounding Outlets

An electrical appliance may appear to be in good repair,
and yet it might be a danger to the user. Older portable
electric drills consist of an electric motor inside a metal
casing. When the switch is depressed, the current flows to
the motor and the drill rotates. As a result of wear, how-
ever, the insulation on the wire inside the drill may dete-
riorate and allow the hot side of the power cord to come
in contact with the metal casing. This will not affect the
operation of the drill.

A person fully clothed using the drill in the living room,
which has a dry floor, will not receive a shock, even
though he or she is in contact with the electrified drill
case. The operator’s body is not grounded because of the
dry floor. If standing on a wet basement floor, the opera-
tor’s body might be grounded; and, when the electrified
drill case is touched, current will pass through the opera-
tor’s body.

To protect people from electrocution, the drill case is usu-
ally connected to the system ground by means of a wire
called an appliance ground. In this instance, as the drill is
plugged in, current will flow between the shorted hot
wire and the drill case and cause the over-current device
to break the circuit. Thus, the appliance ground has pro-
tected the human operator. Newer appliances and tools
are equipped with two-prong polarized plugs, as discussed
in the standards section of this manual.

The appliance ground (Figure 11.19) is the third wire
found on many appliances. The appliance ground will be
of no use unless the outlet into which the appliance is
plugged is grounded. Being in physical contact with a
ground outlet box grounds the outlet. Having a third
ground wire, or a grounded conduit, as part of the circuit
wiring grounds the outlet box.

All new buildings are required to have grounded outlets.
A two-lead circuit tester can be used to test the outlet.
The circuit tester lights when both of its leads are plugged
into the two elongated parallel openings of the outlet. In
addition, the tester lights when one lead is plugged into
the round third opening and the other is plugged into the
hot side of the outlet. Most problems can be resolved
using inexpensive testers resembling a plug with three
leads. These can be purchased in many stores and most
hardware stores for very reasonable prices.

If the conventional two-opening outlet is used, it may be
grounded if the screw that holds the outlet cover plate is
electrically connected to the third-wire ground. The tester
should light when one lead is in contact with a clean

Chapter 11: Electricity 11-13



Page 558: Umm

Figure 11.19. Appliance Ground and Grounded Plug

paint-free metal outlet cover plate screw and the hot side
of the outlet. If the tester does not light, the outlet is not
grounded. If a two-opening outlet is grounded, it may be
adapted for use by a three-wire appliance by using an
adapter. The loose-wire portion or screw tab of the
adapter should be secured behind the metal screw of the
outlet plate cover. Many appliances, such as electric shav-
ers and some new hand tools, are double insulated and
are safe without having a third ground wire.

Polarized Plugs and Connectors

Plugs are polarized or unpolarized. Polarization helps
reduce the potential for shock. Consumers can easily
identify polarized plugs; one blade-the ground prong-is
wider than the other. Three-conductor plugs are
automatically polarized because they can only be inserted
one way. Polarized plugs are used to connect the
most-exposed part of an appliance to the ground wire so
that if you are touching a ground (such as a pipe,
bathtub, or faucet) and the exposed part of an appliance
(the case, the threaded part of a light bulb socket, etc.),
you will not get an electrical shock. Many appliances,
such as electric drills, are doubly insulated so the
probability of any exposed part of the appliance being
connected, by a short or other problem in the appliance,
to either wire is very small. Such devices often use
unpolarized plugs where the two prongs of the plug are
identical.

11-14 Chapter 11: Electricity

Common Electrical Violations

The most obvious things that a housing inspector must

check are the power supply; the type, location, and con-
dition of the wiring; and the number and conditions of
wall outlets or ceiling fixtures required by the local code.
In making an investigation, the following considerations
will serve as useful guides.

¢ Power supply—Where is it, is it grounded properly,
and is it at least of the minimum capacity required to
supply current safely for lighting and the major and
minor appliances in the dwelling?

Panel box covers or doors—These should be
accessible only from the front and should be sealed in
such a way that they can be operated safely without
the danger of contact with live or exposed parts of the
wiring system.

Switch, outlets, and junction boxes—These also
must be covered to protect against danger of electric

shock.

Frayed or bare wires—These are usually the result of
long use and drying out and cracking of the
insulation, which leave the wires exposed, or of
constant friction and rough handling of the wire,
which cause it to fray or become bare. Wiring in this
condition constitutes a safety hazard. Correction of
such defects should be ordered immediately.

Electric cords under rugs or other floor coverings—
Putting electric cords in locations such as these is
prohibited because of the potential fire hazard caused
by continuing contact over a period of time between
these heat-bearing cords and the flammable floor
coverings. Direct the occupant to shift the cords to a
safe location, explain why, and make sure it is done
before you leave.

Ground fault circuit interrupter—All bathroom,
kitchen, and workroom outlets-where shock hazard is
great-should have GFCI outlets. Check for lack of or
nonuse of GFCI outlets.

Bathroom lighting— Bathrooms should include at
least one permanently installed ceiling or wall light
fixture with a wall switch and plate located and
maintained so that there is no danger of short
circuiting from use of other bathroom facilities or
splashing water. Fixture or cover plates should be
insulated or grounded.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 559: ° Lighting of public hallways, stairways, landings,
and foyers—A common standard is sufficient lighting
to illuminate 10 foot-candles on every part of these
areas at all times. Sufficient lighting means that people
can clearly see their feet on all parts of the stairways
and halls. Public halls and stairways in structures
containing less than three dwelling units may be
supplied with conveniently located light switches
controlling an adequate lighting system that may be
turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting.

¢ Habitable room lighting—The standard here may be
two floor convenience outlets (although floor outlets
are dangerous unless protected by proper dust and
water covers) or one convenience outlet and one wall
or ceiling electric light fixture. This number is an
absolute and often inadequate minimum, given the
contemporary widespread use of electricity in the
home. The minimum should be the number required
to provide adequate lighting and power to
accommodate lighting and appliances normally used
in each room.

* Octopus outlets or wiring—This term is applied to
outlets into which plugs have been inserted and are
being used to permit more than two lights or portable
appliances, such as a TV, lamp, or radio, to be
connected to the electrical system. The condition
occurs where the number of outlets is insufficient to
accommodate the normal use of the room. This
practice overloads the circuit and is a potential source

of fire.

* Outlet covers—Every outlet and receptacle must be
covered by a protective plate to prevent contact of its
wiring or terminals with the body, combustible
objects, or water.

Following are six situations that can cause danger and
should also be corrected.

Excessive or Faulty Fusing

The wire’s capacity must not be exceeded by the fuse or
circuit breaker capacity or be left unprotected by faulty
fusing or circuit breakers. Fuses and circuit breakers are
safety devices designed to “blow” to protect against
overloading the electrical system or one or more of its
circuits. Pennies under fuses are there to bypass the fuse.
These are illegal and must be removed. Overfusing is
done for the same reason. The latter can be prevented by
installing modern fusestats, which prevent use of any fuse of a
higher amperage than can be handled by the circuit it serves.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Cords Run Through Walls or Doorways and Hanging
Cords or Wires

This makeshift installation often is the work of an
unqualified handyman or do-it-yourself occupant. The
inspector should check the local electrical code to deter-
mine the policy regarding this type of installation.

Temporary Wiring

Temporary wiring should not be allowed, with the
exception of extension cords that go directly from portable
lights and electric fixtures to convenience outlets.

Excessively Long Extension Cords

City code standards often limit the length of loose cords
or extension lines to a maximum of 8 feet. This is neces-
sary because cords that are too long will overheat if over-
loaded or if a short circuit develops and, thus, create a
fire hazard. This requirement does not apply to specially
designed extension cords for operating portable tools and
trouble lights.

Dead or Dummy Outlets

These are sometimes installed to deceive the housing
inspector. All outlets must be tested or the occupants
questioned to see if these are live and functioning
properly. A dead outlet cannot be counted to determine
compliance with the code.

Aluminum Wiring Inside the Home

Although aluminum is an excellent conductor, it tends to
oxidize on the conducting surface. The nonconductive
oxidized face of the conductor will arc from the remain-
ing conductive surfaces, and this arc can result in fire.

Inspection Steps

The basic tools required by a housing inspector for mak-
ing an electrical inspection are fuse and circuit testers and
a flashlight. The first thing to remember is that you are in
a strange house, and the layout is unfamiliar to you. The
second thing to remember is that you are dealing with
electricity-take no chances. Go to the site of the ground,
usually at the water meter, and check the ground. It
should connect to the water line on the street side of the
water meter or be equipped with a jumper wire. Do not
touch any box or wire until you are sure of the ground.
Go to the main fuse box or circuit breaker box and check
all fuses and breakers for operational integrity (proper
amperage range; functional). Note the condition of the
wiring and of the box itself and check whether it is over-
fused. Examine all wiring in the basement. Make sure
you are standing in a dry spot (concrete poses a particular

Chapter 11: Electricity 11-15



Page 560: problem because you cannot determine its water content
from visual examination) before touching any electrical
device. Standing on a dry piece of wood is far safer than
standing on concrete. Do not disassemble the fuse box,
circuit breaker, or other devices. Decisions must be made
on what you see. If in doubt, consult your supervisor.

Note whether any fuse boxes, circuit breakers, or junction
boxes are uncovered. Examine all wiring for frayed or
bare spots; improper splicing; or rotted, worn, or inade-
quate insulation. Avoid all careless touching; when in
doubt—DON’T! If you see bare wires, have the owner
call an electrician. Look for wires or cords in use in the
basement. Be certain all switch boxes and outlets are in a
tight, sound condition. Make sure that the emergency
switch for an oil burner is at the top of the basement
stairs, not on top of the unit.

Bathrooms, kitchens, and utility rooms-where electric
shock hazard is great-should have GFCI outlets.

While inspecting the bathroom, also check for dangerous
items, such as radios that are not made for bathroom use
or portable electric heaters. Have inappropriate items
removed immediately. Such items have killed thousands
of people who touched them after getting out of the
bathtub or shower while still wet or because the appliance
fell into water the person had contact with.

Electric washer and dryer combinations should have a
240-volt circuit, 30-ampere service connected to a
separate fuse or circuit breaker. Washer and dryer combi-
nations and other portable appliances should be served
by sufficiently heavy electrical service. If either of these
special lines is not available under the above-stated condi-
tions, consult your supervisor.

An electric range needs a 50-ampere, 240-volt circuit. A
dishwasher needs a 20-ampere, 120-volt circuit. A
separate three-wire circuit must be installed for an electric
water heater. Continue your inspection systematically

through the house.

To sum up, the housing inspector investigates specified
electrical elements in a house to detect any obvious evi-
dence of an insufficient power supply, to ensure the avail-
ability of adequate and safe lighting and electrical
facilities, and to discover and correct any obvious hazard.
Because electricity is a technical, complicated field, the
housing inspector, when in doubt, should consult his or
her supervisor. The inspector cannot, however, close the
case until appropriate corrective action has been taken on
all such referrals.

11-16 Chapter 11: Electricity

References

1. National Fire Protection Association. National electrical
code handbook 2005. Florence, KY: Thomson Delmar
Learning; 2005.

2. Center for Disease Control. Basic housing inspection.
Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human Services;
1976.

3. British Columbia Safety Authority. The facts about
aluminum wiring in the home. New Westminster, British
Columbia, Canada: British Columbia Safety Authority;
no date. Available from URL: http://www.safetyauthority.
cal services/esp/The_Facts_About_Aluminum_Wiring

In_The_Home.pdf.

4. Consumer Product Safety Commission. May is National
Electrical Safety Month: good news for
homeowners-aluminum wiring fix still available.
Washington, DC: Consumer Product Safety Commission;
2003. Available from URL: http://www.cpsc.gov/
CPSCPUB/PREREL/prhtml03/03120.html.

5. Consumer Product Safety Commission. CPSC safety
recommendations for aluminum wiring in homes.
Washington, DC: Consumer Product Safety Commission;
1974. Available from URL: http://www.cpsc.gov/
CPSCPUB/PREREL/prhtml74/74040.html.

6. AWG American wire gauge/diameter/resistance. Cologne,
Germany: Bernd Noack; no date. Available from URL:
hetp://www.bnoack.com/data/wire-resistance.html.

7. Consumer Product Safety Commission. Extension cords
fact sheet. Washington, DC: Consumer Product Safety
Commission; no date. CPSC #16. Available from URL:
hetp://www.cpsc.gov/CPSCPUB/PUBS/16.html.

Additional Sources of Information

Croft T, Summers W. American electricians’ handbook.
14th edition, New York: McGraw-Hill Professional; 2002.

Tuck D, Tuck G, Woodson RD. Electrician’s instant
answers. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional; 2003.

Black and Decker. The complete guide to home wiring: a
comprehensive manual, from basic repairs to advanced
projects (Black & Decker Home Improvement Library;
US edition). Chanhassen, MN: Creative Publishing
International; 2001.

Sunset Publishing. Basic wiring. 3rd edition. Menlo Park,
CA: Sunset Books, 1995.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 561: Hometime.com. Electrical service panel: panel compo-
nents, circuit breakers, fuses, electrical glossary.
Hometime.com; no date. Available from URL:
http://www.hometime.com/Howto/ projects/electric/
elec_2.htm.

Vandervort D. How your house works: electric systems.
Glendale, CA: Hometips.com; no date. Available from
URL: http://www.hometips.com/hyhw/electrical/electric.
html.

PNM Resources. Residential subdivisions: electric service
requirements. In: Electric service guide. Albuquerque,
NM: PNM; 2004. Available from URL:
http://www.pnm.com/esg/chapters/56-63.pdf.

Textor K. Extension cord basics. Fine Homebuilding
2000, 129: 84-9. Available from URL:
http://www.taunton.com/finehomebuilding/pages/
h00010.asp.

Consumer Product Safety Commission. Repairing alumi-
num wiring. Washington, DC: Consumer Product Safety
Commission; 1994. CPSC #516. Available from URL:
http://www.cpsc.gov/CPSCPUB/PUBS/516.pdf.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Chapter 11: Electricity

11-17



Page 562: 11-18 Chapter 11: Electricity Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 563: Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating

“Our climate is warming at a faster rate than ever before
ig
recorded.”

D. James Baker
NOAA Administrator, 1993-2004

Introduction

The quotes below provide a profound lesson in the need

for housing to provide protection from both the heat and
cold.

“France heat wave death toll set at 14,802: The death
toll in France from August’s blistering heat wave has
reached nearly 15,000, according to a government-
commissioned report released Thursday, surpassing a
prior tally by more than 3,000.” USA Today,
September 25, 2003.

“In the study of the 1995 Chicago heat wave, those at
greatest risk of dying from the heat were people with
medical illnesses who were socially isolated and did
not have access to air conditioning.” Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, July 4, 2003.

“3, Deaths tied to cold... The bitter cold that gripped
the Northeast through the weekend and iced over
roads was blamed for at least three deaths, including
that of a Philadelphia man found inside a home with-
out heat.” Lexington [Kentucky] Herald Leader,
January 12, 2004.

“In many temperate countries, death rates during the
winter season are 10%—25% higher than those in the
summer.” World Health Organization, Health
Evidence Network, November 1, 2004.

This chapter provides a general overview of the heating
and cooling of today’s homes. Heating and cooling are not
merely a matter of comfort, but of survival. Both very
cold and very hot temperatures can threaten health.
Excessive exposure to heat is referred to as heat stress and
excessive exposure to cold is referred to as cold stress.

In a very hot environment, the most serious health risk is
heat stroke. Heat stroke requires immediate medical atten-
tion and can be fatal or leave permanent damage. Heat
stroke fatalities occur every summer. Heat exhaustion and
fainting are less serious types of illnesses. Typically they
are not fatal, but they do interfere with a person's ability
to work.

At very cold temperatures, the most serious concern is the
risk for hypothermia or dangerous overcooling of the
body. Another serious effect of cold exposure is frostbite
or freezing of exposed extremities, such as fingers, toes,
nose, and ear lobes. Hypothermia can be fatal if immedi-
ate medical attention is not received.

Heat and cold are dangerous because the victims of heat
stroke and hypothermia often do not notice the symp-
toms. This means that family, neighbors, and friends are
essential for early recognition of the onset of the condi-
tions. The affected individual’s survival depends on others

Definitions of Terms Related to HVAC Systems

Air duct—A formed conduit that carries warm or cold air from the furnace or air-conditioner and back again.

Antiflooding Control—A safety control that shuts off fuel and ignition when excessive fuel oil accumulates in th

Appliance:

° High heat—A unit that operates with flue entrance temperature of combustion products above 1,500°F (820°

¢ Medium heat—Same as high-heat
* Low heat—same as high-heat, except below 600°F (320°

Boiler:

xcept above 600°F (320°C).

¢ High pressure—A boiler furnishing pressure at 15 psi or more.

¢ Low pressure (hot water or steam)—A boiler furnishing steam at a pressure less than 15 psi or hot water not more
than 30 psi.

Burner—A device that mixes fuel, air, and ignition in a combustion chamber.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating 12-1



Page 564: to identify symptoms and to seek medical help. Family,
neighbors, and friends must be particularly diligent dur-
ing heat or cold waves to check on individuals who live
alone.

Heat stroke signs and symptoms include sudden and
severe fatigue, nausea, dizziness, rapid pulse, lightheaded-
ness, confusion, unconsciousness, extremely high temper-

ature, and hot and dry skin surface. An individual who

appears disorientated or confused, seems euphoric or
unaccountably irritable, or suffers from malaise or flulike
symptoms should be moved to a cool location and medi-
cal advice should be sought immediately.

Although symptoms vary from person to person, the
warning signs of heat exhaustion include confusion and
profuse and prolonged sweating. The person should be
removed from the heat, cooled, and heavily hydrated.

Carbon monoxide (CO) detector—A device used to detect CO (specific gravity of 0.97 vs. 1.00 for oxygen, a colorless
odorless gas resulting from combustion of fuel). CO detectors should be placed on each floor of the structure at eye level and
should have an audible alarm and, when possible, a digital readout at eye level.

Chimney—A vertical shaft containing one or more passageways.

Factory-built chimney—A tested and accredited flue for venting gas appliances, incinerators and solid or liquid
fuel-burning appliances.

Masonry chimney—A field-constructed chimney built of masonry and lined with terra cotta flue or firebrick.
Metal chimney—A field-constructed chimney of metal.
Chimney connector—A pipe or breeching that connects the heating appliance to the chimney.

Clearance—The distance separating the appliance, chimney connector, plenum, and flue from the nearest surface of
combustible material.

Central cooling system—An electric or gas-powered system containing an outside compressor, cooling coils, and a ducting
system inside the structure designed to supply cool air uniformly throughout the structure.

Central heating system—A flue connected boiler or furnace installed as an integral part of the structure and designed to
supply heat adequately for the structure.

Collectors—The key component of active solar systems and are designed to meet the specific temperature requirements and

climate conditions for different end uses. Several types of solar collectors exist: flat-plate collectors, evacuated-tube collectors,

concentrating collectors, and transpired air collectors.

Controls:

¢ High-low limit control—An automatic control that responds to liquid level changes and will shut down if they are
exceeded.

¢ Primary safety control—The automatic safety control intended to prevent abnormal discharge of fuel at the burner in
case of ignition failure or flame failure.

Combustion safety control—A primary safety control that responds to flame properties, sensing the presence of flame and

causing fuel to be shut off in event of flame failure.

Convector—A radiator that supplies a maximum amount of heat by convection, using many closely spaced metal fins fitted
onto pipes that carry hot water or steam and thereby heat the circulating air.

Conversion—A boiler or furnace, flue connected, originally designed for solid fuel but converted for liquid or gas fuel.

Damper—A valve for regulating draft on coal-fired equipment. Generally located on the exhaust side of the combustion
chamber, usually in the chimney connector. Dampers are not allowed on oil- and gas-fired equipment.

Draft hood—A device placed in and made a part of the vent connector (chimney connector or smoke pipe) from an appli-
ance, or in the appliance itself. The hood is designed to a) ensure the ready escape of the products of combustion in the event
of no draft, back draft, or stoppage beyond the draft hood; b) prevent backdraft from entering the appliance; and c) neutral-
ize the effect of stack action of the chimney flue upon appliance operation.

Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating Healthy Housing Reference Manual




Page 565: Warning signs of hypothermia include nausea, fatigue,
dizziness, irritability, or euphoria. Individuals also experi-
ence pain in their extremities (e.g., hands, feet, ears) and
severe shivering. People who exhibit these symptoms, par-
ticularly the elderly and young, should be moved to a
heated shelter and medical advice should be sought when
appropriate.

heat, cool air, and ventilation, and helps control dust and
moisture, which can lead to adverse health effects. The
variables to be controlled are temperature, air quality, air
motion, and relative humidity. Temperature must be
maintained uniformly throughout the heated/cooled area.
There is a 6°F to 10°F (-14°C to -12°C) variation in
room temperature from floor to ceiling. The adequacy of

the HVAC system and the air-tightness of the structure
or room determine the degree of personal safety and
comfort within the dwelling.

The function of a heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning (HVAC) system is to provide for more than
human health and comfort. The HVAC system produces

Definitions of Terms Related to HVAC Systems

Draft regulator—A device that functions to maintain a desired draft in oil-fired appliances by automatically reducing the
chimney draft to the desired value. Sometimes this device is referred to in the field as air-balance, air-stat, or flue velocity
control or barometer damper.

Fuel oil—A liquid mixture or compound derived from petroleum that does not emit flammable vapor below a temperature

of 125°F (52°C).
Heat—The warming of a building, apartment, or room by a furnace or electrical stove.

Heating plant—The furnace, boiler, or the other heating devices used to generate steam, hot water, or hot air, which then is
circulated through a distribution system. It typically uses coal, gas, oil or wood as its source of heat.

Limit control—A thermostatic device installed in the duct system to shut off the supply of heat at a predetermined tempera-
ture of the circulated air.

Oil burner—A device for burning oil in heating appliances such as boilers, furnaces, water heaters, and ranges. A burner of
this type may be a pressure-atomizing gun type, a horizontal or vertical rotary type, or a mechanical or natural draft-vaporiz-

ing type.
Oil stove—A flue-connected, self-contained, self-supporting oil-burning range or room heater equipped with an integral
tank not exceeding 10 gallons; it may be designed to be connected to a separate oil tank.

Plenum chamber—An air compartment to which one or more distributing air ducts are connected.

Pump, automatic oil—A device that automatically pumps oil from the supply tank and delivers it in specific quantities to
an oil-burning appliance. The pump or device is designed to stop pumping automatically if the oil supply line breaks.

Radiant heat—A method of heating a building by means of electric coils, hot water, or steam pipes installed in the floors,
walls, or ceilings.

Register—A grille-covered opening in a floor, ceiling, or wall through which hot or cold air can be introduced into a room.
It may or may not be arranged to permit closing the grille.

Room heater—A self-contained, freestanding heating appliance (space heater) intended for installation in the space being
heated and not intended for duct connection.

Smoke detector—A device installed in several rooms of the structure to warn of the presence of smoke. It should provide an
audible alarm. It can be battery powered or electric, or both. If the unit is battery powered, the batteries should be tested or
checked on a routine basis and changed once per year. If the unit is equipped with a 10-year battery, it is not necessary to re-
place the battery every year.

Tank—A separate tank connected, directly or by pump, to an oil-burning appliance.
Thimble—A metal or terra cotta lining for a chimney or furnace pipe.
Valve (main shut-off valve)—A manually operated valve in an oil line used to turn the oil supply to the burner on or off.

Vent system— The gas vent or chimney and vent connector, if used, assembled to form a continuous, unobstructed passage-
way from the gas appliance to the outside atmosphere to remove vent gases.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual pter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating




Page 566: Gas, electricity, oil, coal, wood, and solar energy are the
main energy sources for home heating and cooling. Heating
systems commonly used are steam, hot water and hot air.
A housing inspector should have knowledge of the
various heating fuels and systems to be able to determine
their adequacy and safety in operation. To cover fully all
aspects of the heating and cooling system, the entire area
and physical components of the system must be considered.

Heating

Fifty-one percent of the homes in the United States are
heated with natural gas, 30% are heated with electricity,
and 9% with fuel oil. The remaining 11% are heated
with bottled fuel, wood, coal, solar, geothermal, wind, or
solar energy [1]. Any home using combustion as a source
of heating, cooling, or cooking or that has an attached
garage should have appropriately located and maintained
carbon monoxide (CO) gas detectors. According to the
U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC),
from data collected in 2000, CO kills 200 people and
sends more than 10,000 to the hospital each year.

The standard fuels for heating are discussed below.

Standard Fuels

Gas

More than 50% of American homes use gas fuel. Gas
fuels are colorless gases. Some have a characteristic pungent
odor; others are odorless and cannot be detected by smell.
Although gas fuels are easily handled in heating equipment,
their presence in air in appreciable quantities becomes a
serious health hazard. Gases diffuse readily in the air,
making explosive mixtures possible. A proportion of
combustible gas and air that is ignited burns with such a
high velocity that an explosive force is created. Because of
these characteristics of gas fuels, precautions must be
taken to prevent leaks, and care must be exercised when
gas-fired equipment is lit.

Gas is broadly classified as natural or manufactured.

e Natural gas—This gas is a mixture of several
combustible and inert gases. It is one of the richest
gases and is obtained from wells ordinarily located in
petroleum-producing areas. The heat content may vary
from 700 to 1,300 British thermal units (BTUs) per
cubic foot, with a generally accepted average figure of
1,000 BTUs per cubic foot. Natural gases are
distributed through pipelines to the point of use and
are often mixed with manufactured gas to maintain a
guaranteed BTU content.

12-4 Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating

¢ Manufactured gas—This gas, as distributed, is usually
a combination of certain proportions of gases
produced from coke, coal, and petroleum. Its BTU
value per cubic foot is generally closely regulated, and
costs are determined on a guaranteed BTU basis,
usually 520 to 540 BTUs per cubic foot.

Liquefied petroleum gas—Principal products of
liquefied petroleum gas are butane and propane.
Butane and propane are derived from natural gas or
petroleum refinery gas and are chemically classified as
hydrocarbon gases. Specifically, butane and propane
are on the borderline between a liquid and a gaseous
state. At ordinary atmospheric pressure, butane is a gas
above 33°F (0.6°C) and propane a gas at -42°F
(-41°C). These gases are mixed to produce commercial
gas suitable for various climatic conditions. Butane
and propane are heavier than air. The heat content of
butane is 3,274 BTUs per cubic foot, whereas that of
propane is 2,519 BTUs per cubic foot.

Gas burners should be equipped with an automatic shut-
off in case the flame fails. Shutoff valves should be
located within 1 foot of the burner connection and on
the output side of the meter.

Caution: Liquefied petroleum gas is heavier than air;
therefore, the gas will accumulate at the bottom of con-
fined areas. If a leak develops, care should be taken to
ventilate the appliance before lighting it.

Electricity

Electricity has gained popularity for heating in many
regions, particularly where costs are competitive with
other sources of heat energy, with usage increasing from
2% in 1960 to 30% in 2000. With an electric system, the
housing inspector should rely mainly on the electrical
inspector to determine proper installation. There are a
few items, however, to be concerned with to ensure safe
use of the equipment. Check to see that the units are
approved by an accredited testing agency and installed
according to the manufacturer's specifications. Most con-
vector-type units must be installed at least 2 inches above
the floor level, not only to ensure that proper convection
currents are established through the unit, but also to
allow sufficient air insulation from any combustible floor-
ing material. The housing inspector should check for cur-
tains that extend too close to the unit or loose, long-pile
rugs that are too close. A distance of 6 inches on the floor
and 12 inches on the walls should separate rugs or cur-
tains from the appliance.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 567: Heat pumps are air conditioners that contain a valve that
allows switching between air conditioner and heater.
When the valve is switched one way, the heat pump acts
like an air conditioner; when it is switched the other way,
it reverses the flow of refrigerants and acts like a heater.
Cold is the absence of energy or calories of heat. To cool
something, the heat must be removed; to warm some-
thing, energy or calories of heat must be provided. Heat
pumps do both.

A heat pump has a few additions beyond the typical air
conditioner: a reversing valve, two thermal expansion
valves, and two bypass valves. The reversing valve allows
the unit to provide both cooling and heating. Figure 12.1
shows a heat pump in cooling mode. The unit operates as
follows:

¢ The compressor compacts the refrigerant vapor and
pumps it to the reversing valve.

¢ The reversing valve directs the compressed vapor to
flow to the outside heat exchanger (condenser), where
the refrigerant is cooled and condensed to a liquid.

¢ The air blowing through the condenser coil removes
heat from the refrigerant.

° The liquid refrigerant bypasses the first thermal
expansion valve and flows to the second thermal
expansion valve at the inside heat exchanger
(evaporator) where it expands into the evaporator and
becomes vapor.

¢ The refrigerant picks up heat energy from the air
blowing across the evaporator coil and cool air comes
out at the other side of the coil. The cool air is ducted
to the occupied space as air-conditioned air.

¢ The refrigerant vapor then goes back to the reversing
valve to be directed to the compressor to start the
refrigeration cycle all over again.

Reversing Valve

Inside Heat Exchanger Qutside Heat Exchanger

— Liquid Retrigerant

Figure 12.1. Heat Pump in Cooling Mode [2]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Heat pumps [3] are quite efficient in their use of energy.
However, heat pumps often freeze up; that is, the coils in
the outside air collect ice. The heat pump has to melt
this ice periodically, so it switches itself back to air con-
ditioner mode to heat up the coils. To avoid pumping
cold air into the house in air conditioner mode, the heat
pump also uses electric strip heaters to heat the cold air
that the air conditioner is pumping out. Once the ice is
melted, the heat pump switches back to heating mode
and turns off the burners.

Radiant heat warms objects directly with longwave elec-
tromagnetic energy. The heating panels diffuse heating
energy rays in a 160° arc, distributing warmth evenly.
The goal is to achieve no more than a 4°F (-16°C) differ-
ence in temperature between floor level and ceiling level.
When properly installed, radiant heat warms a room
sooner and at lower temperature settings than do other
kinds of heat. Extreme care must be taken to protect
against fire hazards from objects in close proximity to the
infrared radiation reflectors. Inspectors dealing with this
heat source should have specialized training. Radiant
heating is plastered into the ceiling or wall in some
homes or in the brick or ceramic floors of bathrooms. If
wires are bare in the plaster, they should be treated as
open and exposed wiring. The inspector should be
knowledgeable about these systems, which are technical
and relatively new.

Fuel Oil

Fuel oils are derived from petroleum, which consists pri-
marily of compounds of hydrogen and carbon (hydrocar-
bons) and smaller amounts of nitrogen and sulfur.
Domestic fuel oils are controlled by rigid specifications.
Six grades of fuel oil—numbered 1 through 6—are gen-
erally used in heating systems; the lighter two grades are
used primarily for domestic heating:

¢ Grade Number 1—a volatile, distillate oil for use in
burners that prepare fuel for burning solely by
vaporization (oil-fired space heaters).

¢ Grade Number 2—a moderate weight, volatile,
distillate oil used for burners that prepare oil for
burning by a combination of vaporization and
atomization. This grade of oil is commonly used in
domestic heating furnaces.

Heating values of oil vary from approximately 152,000
BTU per gallon for number 6 oil to 136,000 BTU per
gallon for number 1 oil. Oil is more widely used today
than coal and provides a more automatic source of heat
and comfort. It also requires more complicated systems

Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating 12-5



Page 568: and controls. If the oil supply is in the basement or cellar
area, certain code regulations must be followed (Figure
12.2) [4-7]. No more than two 275-gallon tanks may be
installed above ground in the lowest story of any one
building. The IRC recommends a maximum fuel oil stor-
age of 660 gallons. The tank shall not be closer than 7
feet horizontally to any boiler, furnace, stove, or exposed
flame(s).

Fuel oil lines should be embedded in a concrete or
cement floor or protected against damage if they run
across the floor. Each tank must have a shutoff valve that
will stop the flow if a leak develops in the line to or in
the burner itself. A leak-tight liner or pan should be
installed under tanks and lines located above the floor.
They contain potential leaks so the oil does not spread
over the floor, creating a fire hazard.

The tank or tanks must be vented to the outside, and a
gauge showing the quantity of oil in the tank or tanks
must be tight and operative. Steel tanks constructed
before 1985 had a life expectancy of 12-20 years. Tanks
must be off the floor and on a stable base to prevent set-
tlement or movement that may rupture the connections.
Figure 12.3 shows a buried outside tank installation. In
1985, federal legislation was passed requiring that the
exterior components of underground storage tanks
(USTs) installed after 1985 resist the effects of pressure,
vibration, and movement. Federal regulations for USTs
exclude the following: farm and residential tanks of 1,100
gallons (420 liters) or less capacity; tanks storing heating
oil used on the premises; tanks on or above the floor of
basements; septic tanks; flow-through process tanks; all
tanks with capacity of 110 gallons or less; and emergency
spill and overfill tanks [8]. A review of local and state
regulations should be completed before installing under-
ground tanks because many jurisdictions do not allow
burial of gas or oil tanks.

Coal

The four types of coal are anthracite, bituminous, sub-
bituminous, and lignite. Coal is prepared in many sizes
and combinations of sizes. The combustible portions of
the coal are fixed carbons, volatile matter (hydrocarbons),
and small amounts of sulfur. In combination with these
are noncombustible elements composed of moisture and
impurities that form ash. The various types differ in heat
content. Heat content is determined by analysis and is
expressed in British thermal units per pound.

Improper coal furnace operation can result in an
extremely hazardous and unhealthy home. Ventilation of
the area surrounding the furnace is very important to pre-
vent heat buildup and to supply air for combustion.

Solar Energy

Solar energy has gained popularity in the last 25 years as
the cost of installation of solar panels and battery storage
has decreased. Improved technology with panels,
installation of panels, piping, and batteries has created a
much larger market. Solar energy largely has been used to
heat water. Today, there are more than a million solar
water-heating systems in the United States. Solar water
heaters use direct sun to heat either water or a
heat-transfer fluid in collectors [3]. That water is then
stored for use as needed, with a conventional system
providing any necessary additional heating. A typical
system will reduce the need for conventional water
heating by about two-thirds, minimizing the cost of
electricity or the use of fossil fuel and thus the
environmental impact associated with their use. The U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development and
the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) have instituted
initiatives to deploy new solar technologies in the next
generation of American housing [3]. For example, DOE

VENT LINE 1/4" PIPE

FILLER CAP

DRAFT
REGULATOR

"9 was
[Hacennar

‘A°OD SOFT COPPER TUBING

Figure 12.2. Piping Hookup for Inside Tank Installation [4]

12-6 Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating

SWINGING

TO WIRING ZN

STACK RELAY

ANTISIPHON VALVE
(UNDERWRITER LISTED)

TO FLUE

PIPE 3" BELOW FLOOR

Figure 12.3. Piping Hookup for Buried Outside Tank [4]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 569: has the Million Solar Roofs Initiative begun in 1997 to
install solar energy systems in more than 1 million U.S.
buildings by 2010.

Central Heating Units

The boiler should be placed in a separate room whenever
possible, which is usually required in new construction.
In most housing inspections, however, the inspector is
dealing with existing conditions and must adapt the situ-
ation as closely as possible to acceptable safety standards.
In many old buildings, the furnace is located in the cen-
ter of the cellar or basement. This location does not lend
itself to practical conversion to a boiler room.

Consider the physical requirements for a boiler or
furnace.

¢ Ventilation—More circulating air is required for the
boiler room than for a habitable room, to reduce the
heat buildup caused by the boiler or furnace and to
supply oxygen for combustion.

¢ Fire protection rating—As specified by various codes
(fire code, building code, and insurance underwriters),
the fire regulations must be strictly adhered to in areas
surrounding the boiler or furnace. This minimum
clearance for a boiler or furnace from a wall or ceiling
is shown in Figures 12.4 and 12.5.

Asbestos was used in numerous places on furnaces to pro-
tect buildings from fire and to prevent lost heat. Figure
12.6 shows asbestos-coated heating ducts, for example.
Where asbestos insulation is found, it must be handled
with care (breathing protection and protective clothing)
and care must be taken to prevent or contain release into
the air [10].

The furnace or boiler makes it difficult to supply air and
ventilation for the room. Where codes and local authority
permit, it may be more practical to place the furnace or
boiler in an open area. The ceiling above the furnace
should be protected to a distance of 3 feet beyond all

TILE 2 COURSES
‘AS SHOWN:
SHEET METAL
NONFLAMMABLE PAD ees.
FIRE-RESISTANT SURFACE ———Sp

PIPELESS HOT AIR FURNACE GRAVITY WARM AIR FURNACE SSS

Figure 12.4. Minimum Clearance for Pipeless Hot Air and Gravity Warm
Air Furnace [4]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

furnace or boiler appurtenances, and this area should be
free of all storage material. The furnace or boiler should
be on a firm foundation of concrete if located in the cel-
lar or basement. If codes permit furnace installations on
the first floor, then they must be consulted for proper set-
ting and location.

Heating Boilers

The term boiler is applied to the single heat source that
can supply either steam or hot water (a boiler is often
called a heater).

Boilers may be classified according to several kinds of
characteristics. They are typically made from cast iron or
steel. Their construction design may be sectional, porta-
ble, fire-tube, water-tube, or special. Domestic heating
boilers are generally of low-pressure type with a maxi-
mum working pressure of 15 pounds per square inch
(psi) for steam and 30 psi for hot water. All boilers have a
combustion chamber for burning fuel. Automatic fuel-fir-
ing devices help supply the fuel and control the combus-

STEAM AND/OR HOT WATER BOILER MECHANICAL WARM AIR FURNACE

Figure 12.5. Minimum Clearance for Steam or Hot Water Boiler and
Mechanical Warm-air Furnace [4]

Figure 12.6. Heating Ducts Covered With Asbestos Insulation

Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating 12-7



Page 570: tion. Hand firing is accomplished by the provision of a
grate, ash pit, and controllable drafts to admit air under
the fuel bed and over it through slots in the firing door.
A check draft is required at the smoke pipe connection to
control chimney draft. The gas passes from the combus-
tion chamber to the flue passages (smoke pipe) designed
for maximum possible transfer of heat from the gas.
Provisions must be made for cleaning flue passages.

Cast-iron boilers are usually shipped in sections and
assembled at the site. They are generally classified as

® square or rectangular boilers with vertical sections; and
q' g

* round, square, or rectangular boilers with horizontal
pancake sections.

Most steel boilers are assembled units with welded steel
construction and are called portable boilers. Large boilers
are installed in refractory brick settings on the site. Above
the combustion chamber, a group of tubes is suspended,
usually horizontally, between two headers. If flue gases
pass through the tubes and water surrounds them, the
boiler is designated as the fire-tube type. When water
flows through the tubes, it is termed water-tube. Fire-
tube is the predominant type.

Heating Furnaces

Heating furnaces are the heat sources used when air is the
heat-carrying medium. When air circulates because of the
different densities of the heated and cooled air, the fur-
nace is a gravity type. A fan may be included for the air
circulation; this type is called a mechanical warm-air fur-
nace. Furnaces may be of cast iron or steel and burn vari-

ous types of fuel.

Some new furnaces are as fuel efficient as 95%. Furnaces
with an efficiency of 90% or greater use two heat
exchangers instead of one. Energy savings come not only
from the increased efficiency, but also from improved
comfort at lower thermostat settings.

Fuel-burning Furnaces

Some localities throughout the United States still use coal
as a heating fuel, including residences, schools, colleges
and universities, small manufacturing facilities, and other
facilities located near coal sources.

In many older furnaces, the coal is stoked or fed into the
firebox by hand. The single-retort, underfeed-type bitu-
minous coal stoker is the most commonly used domestic
automatic-stoking steam or hot-water boiler (Figure
12.7). The stoker consists of a coal hopper, a screw for
conveying coal from hopper to retort, a fan that supplies

12-8 Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating

air for combustion, a transmission for driving coal feed
and fan, and an electric motor for supplying power. The
air for combustion is admitted to the fuel through tuyeres
(air inlets) at the top of the retort. The stoker feeds coal
to the furnace intermittently in accordance with tempera-
ture or pressure demands.

Oil burners are broadly designated as distillate, domestic,
and commercial or industrial. Distillate burners are usu-
ally found in oil-fired space heaters. Domestic oil burners
are usually power driven and are used in domestic heating
plants. Commercial or industrial burners are used in
larger central-heating plants for steam or power
generation.

Domestic oil burners vaporize and atomize the oil and
deliver a predetermined quantity of oil and air to the
combustion chambers. Domestic oil burners operate
automatically to maintain a desired temperature.

Gun-type burners atomize the oil either by oil pressure or
by low-pressure air forced through a nozzle. The oil sys-
tem pressure-atomizing burner consists of a strainer,
pump, pressure-regulating valve, shutoff valve and atom-
izing nozzle. The air system consists of a power-driven
fan and an air tube that surrounds the nozzle and elec-
trode assembly.

The fan and oil pump are generally connected directly to
the motor. Oil pressures normally used are about 100 psi,
but pressures considerably in excess of this are sometimes
used.

The form and parts of low-pressure, air-atomizing burn-
ers are similar to high-pressure atomizing (gun) burners
(Figure 12.8) except for addition of a small air pump and
a different way of delivering air and oil to the nozzle or
orifice.

The atomizing type burner, sometimes known as a radi-
ant or suspended flame burner, atomizes oil by throwing

BREECHING

BOILER

HOPPER

MOTOR BLOWER TUYERES

AND TRANSMISSION

WINDBOX
WORM

RETORT
WORM HOUSING

Figure 12.7. Typical Underfeed Coal Stoker Installation in Small Boilers [4]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 571: it from the circumference of a rapidly rotating motor-
driven cup. The burner is installed so that the driving
parts are protected from the heat of the flame by a hearth
of refractory material at about the grate elevation. Oil is
fed by pump or gravity; the draft is mechanical or a com-
bination of natural and mechanical.

Horizontal rotary burners were originally designed for
commercial and industrial use but are available in sizes
suitable for domestic use. In this burner, fuel oil being
thrown in a conical spray from a rapidly rotating cup is
atomized. Horizontal rotary burners use electric gas or
gas-pilot ignition and operate with a wide range of fuels,
primarily Numbers 1 and 2 fuel oil. Primary safety con-
trols for burner operation are necessary. An antiflooding
device must be a part of the system to stop oil flow if
ignition in the burner should fail. Likewise, a stack con-
trol is necessary to shut off the burner if the stack tem-
peratures are exceeded, thus cutting off all power to the
burner. This button must be reset before starting can be
attempted. The newer models now use electric eye-type
control on the burner itself.

On the basis of the method used to ignite fuels, burners
are divided into five groups:

° Electric—A high-voltage electric spark in the path of
an oil and air mixture causes ignition. This electric
spark may be continuous or may operate only long
enough to ignite the oil. Electric ignition is almost
universally used. Electrodes are located near the
nozzles, but not in the path of the oil spray.

° Gas pilot—A small gas pilot light that burns
continuously is frequently used. Gas pilots usually
have expanded gas valves that automatically increase
flame size when a motor circuit starts. After a fixed
interval, the flame reverts to normal size (Figure 12.9).

NEUTRAL
SERVICE

CONDUIT
TO BRANCH
NICE
poe CIRCUITS

BUSHING

GROUNDING CONDUIT
GROUND WIRE

Figure 12.8. Cutaway View of Typical High-pressure Gun Burner [4]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

° Electric gas—An electric spark ignites a gas jet, which
in turn ignites the oil-air mixture.

* Oil pilot—A small oil flame is used.

¢ Manual—A burning wick or torch is placed in the
combustion space through peepholes and thus ignites
the charge. The operator should stand to one side of
the fire door to guard against injury from chance
explosion.

The refractory lining or material should be an insulating
fireproof bricklike substance, never ordinary firebrick.
The insulating brick should be set on end to build a
2¥%-inch-thick wall from furnace to furnace. The size and
shape of the refractory pot vary from furnace to furnace.
The shape can be either round or square, whichever is
more convenient to build. It is more important to use a
special cement having properties similar to that of the
insulating refractory-type brick.

Steam Heating Systems

Steam heating systems are classified according to the pipe
arrangement, accessories used, method of returning the
condensate to the boiler, method of expelling air from the
system, or the type of control used. The successful
operation of a steam heating system consists of generating
steam in sufficient quantity to equalize building heat loss
at maximum efficiency, expelling entrapped air, and
returning all condensate to the boiler rapidly. Steam

Figure 12.9. Gas-fired Boiler
Source: HUD

Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating 12-9



Page 572: cannot enter a space filled with air or water at pressure
equal to the steam pressure. It is important, therefore, to
eliminate air and remove water from the distribution
system. All hot pipelines exposed to contact by residents
must be properly insulated or guarded. Steam heating
systems use the following methods to return the
condensate to the boiler:

* Gravity one-pipe air-vent system—One of the
earliest types used, this method returns condensate to
the boiler by gravity. This system is generally found in
one-building-type heating systems. The steam is
supplied by the boiler and carried through a single
system or pipe to radiators, as shown in Figure 12.10.
Return of the condensate is dependent on hydrostatic
head. Therefore, the end of the stream main, where it
attaches to the boiler, must be full of water (termed a
wet return) for a distance above the boiler line to
create a pressure drop balance between the boiler and
the stream main.

Radiators are equipped with an inlet valve and an air
valve. The air valve permits venting of air from the
radiator and its displacement by steam. Condensate is
drained from the radiator through the same pipe that
supplies steam.

* Two-pipe steam vapor system with return trap—
The two-pipe vapor system with boiler return trap and
air eliminator is an improvement of the one-pipe
system. The return connection of the radiator has a
thermostatic trap that permits flow of condensate and
air only from the radiator and prevents steam from
leaving the radiator. Because the return main is at
atmospheric pressure or less, a boiler return trap is
installed to equalize condensate return pressure with
boiler pressure.

Water Heating Systems

All water heating systems are similar in design and
operating principle. The one-pipe gravity water heating
system is the most elementary of the gravity systems and
is shown in Figure 12.10. Water is heated at the lowest
point in the system. It rises through a single main because
of a difference in density between hot and cold water.
The supply rise or radiator branch takes off from the top
of the main to supply water to the radiators. After the
water gives up heat in the radiator, it goes back to the
same main through return piping from the radiator. This
cooler return water mixes with water in the supply main
and causes the water to cool a little. As a result, the next
radiator on the system has a lower emission rate and must

be larger.

12-10 Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating

Note in Figure 12.11 that the high points of the hot
water system are vented and the low points are drained.
In this case, the radiators are the high points and the
heater is the low point.

° One-pipe forced-feed system—lIf a pump or
circulator is introduced in the main near the heater of
the one-pipe system, it becomes a forced system that
can be used for much larger applications than can the
gravity type. This system can operate at higher water
temperatures than the gravity system can. When the
water is moving faster and at higher temperatures, it
makes a more responsive system, with smaller
temperature drops and smaller radiators for the same
heating load.

° Two-pipe gravity system—A one-pipe gravity system
may become a two-pipe system if the return radiator
branch connects to a second main that returns water
to the heater (Figure 12.12). Water temperature is
practically the same in the entire radiator.

° Two-pipe forced-circulation system—This system is
similar to a one-pipe forced-circulation system except
that it uses the same piping arrangement found in the
two-pipe gravity system.

¢ Expansion tanks—When water is heated, it tends to
expand. Therefore, an expansion tank is necessary in a
hot water system. The expansion tank, either open or
closed, must be of sufficient size to permit a change in
water volume within the heating system. If the
expansion tank is open, it must be placed at least 3
feet above the highest point of the system. It will
require a vent and an overflow. The open tank is
usually in an attic, where it needs protection from
freezing.

The closed expansion tank is found in modern instal-
lations. An air cushion in the tank compresses and

AIR VALVE

“—~ GIVE GOOD PITCH

AIR VALVE

AIR VENT Be
RISER

SUPPLY MAIN Ch OP
as
=
RISER DRIPPED { 5
i
RETURN j
éoumecnon BOILER WATER LINE | 2
2 SS a

WET RETURN

Figure 12.10. Typical Gravity One-pipe Heating System [4]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 573: expands according to the change of volume and pres-
sure in the system. Closed tanks are usually at the low
point in the system and close to the heater. They can,
however, be placed at almost any location within the
heating system.

Air Heating Systems

Gravity Warm-air Heating Systems. These operate
because of the difference in specific gravity of warm air
and cold air. Warm air is lighter than cold air and rises if
cold air is available to replace it (Figure 12.13).

* Operation—Satisfactory operation of a gravity warm-
air heating system depends on three factors: size of
warm air and cold air ducts, heat loss of the building,
and heat available from the furnace.

¢ Heat distribution—The most common source of
trouble in these systems is insufficient pipe area,
usually in the return or cold air duct. The total cross-
section area of the cold duct or ducts must be at least
equal to the total cross-section area of all warm ducts.

° Pipeless furnaces—The pipeless hot-air furnace is the
simplest type of hot-air furnace and is suitable for
small homes where all rooms can be grouped about a
single large register. Other pipeless gravity furnaces are
often installed at floor level. These are really oversized
jacketed space heaters. The most common difficulty
experienced with this type of furnace is supplying a
return air opening of sufficient size on the floor.

Forced Warm-air Heating Systems. The mechanical
warm-air furnace is the most modern type of warm-air
equipment (Figures 12.13 and 12.14). It is the safest type
because it operates at low temperatures. The principle of

VENT
OPEN EXPANSION TANK

OVERFLOW RADIATOR

PRESSURE
RELIEF VALVE

Figure 12.11. One-pipe Gravity Water Heating System [4]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

a forced-warm-air heating system is very similar to that of
the gravity system, except that a fan or blower is added to
increase air movement. Because of the assistance of the
fan or blower, the pitch of the ducts or leaders can be dis-
regarded; therefore, it is practical to deliver heated air in
the most convenient places.

¢ Operation—In a forced-air system, operation of the
fan or blower must be controlled by air temperature in
a bonnet or by a blower control furnace stat. The
blower control starts the fan or blower when the
temperature reaches a certain point and turns the fan
or blower off when the temperature drops to a
predetermined point.

¢ Heat distribution— Dampers in the various warm-air
ducts control distribution of warm air either at the
branch takeoff or at the warm-air outlet. Humidifiers
are often mounted in the supply bonnet to regulate
the humidity within the residence.

SUPPLY
MAIN

CLOSED EXPANSION

RADIATOR

AUTOMATIC
AIR VENT

PRESSURE
RELIEF VALVE

Figure 12.12. Two-pipe Gravity Water Heating System [4]

PLENUM OR BONNET
DISTRIBUTION PIPES

RADIATION AREA

CLEAN OUT
SMOKE COLLAR

FIRE DOOR COMBUSTION

CHAMBER
COAL

AIR SLOTS

SHAKER GRATE 0

Taigtitgtala lst

COMBUSTION
AIR SUPPLY

FLOOR

DRAFT DOOR

Figure 12.13. Warm-air Convection Furnace [4]

Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating 12-11



Page 574: Space Heaters

Space heaters are the least desirable type of heating from
the viewpoint of fire safety and housing inspection. A
space heater is a self-contained, free-standing air-heating
appliance intended for installation in the space being
heated and not intended for duct connection. According
to the CPSC, consumers are not using care when pur-
chasing and using space heaters. Approximately 21,800
residential fires are caused by space heaters a year, and
300 people die in these fires. An estimated 6,000 persons
receive hospital emergency room care for burn injuries
associated with contacting hot surfaces of space heaters,
mostly in nonfire situations.

Individuals using space heaters should use the heaters in
accordance with the following precautions:

* Read and follow the manufacturer's operating
instructions. A good practice is to read aloud the
instructions and warning labels to all members of the
household to be certain that everyone understands
how to operate the heater safely. Keep the owner's
manual in a convenient place to refer to when needed.

* Choose a space heater that has been tested and
certified by a nationally recognized testing laboratory.
These heaters meet specific safety standards.

¢ Buy a heater that is the correct size for the area you
want to heat. The wrong size heater could produce
more pollutants and may not be an efficient use of
energy.

* Choose models that have automatic safety switches
that turn off the unit if it is tipped over accidentally.

* Select a space heater with a guard around the flame
area or heating element. Place the heater on a level,
hard, nonflammable surface, not on rugs or carpets or
near bedding or drapes. Keep the heater at least 3 feet
from bedding, drapes, furniture, or other flammable
materials.

ARROWS INDICATE WARM AIR BEING DISCHARGED FROM DUCTS,
BLANKETING ROOM WITH HEAT

AIR IS HEATED
BY FURNACE |—-— COLD AIR PULLED OFF FLOORS
LJ :

AND RETURNED TO FURNACE

BLOWER

Figure 12.14. Cross-sectional View of Building Showing Forced Warm-air
Heating System [4]

12-12. Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating

Keep doors open to the rest of the house if you are
using an unvented fuel-burning space heater. This
helps prevent pollutant build-up and promotes proper
combustion. Follow the manufacturer's instructions for
oil heaters to provide sufficient combustion air to
prevent CO production.

Never leave a space heater on when you go to sleep.
Never place a space heater close to any sleeping person.

Turn the space heater off if you leave the area. Keep
children and pets away from space heaters. Children
should not be permitted to either adjust the controls
or move the heater.

Keep any portable heater as least 3 feet away from
curtains, newspapers, or anything that might burn.

Have a smoke detector with fresh batteries on each
level of the house and a CO detector outside the
sleeping area. Install a CO monitor near oil space
heaters at the height recommended by the
manufacturer.

Be aware that mobile homes require specially designed
heating equipment. Only electric or vented fuel-fired
heaters should be used.

Have gas and kerosene space heaters inspected
annually.

Do not hang items to dry above or on the heater.
Keep all heaters out of exit and high-traffic areas.

Keep portable electric heaters away from sinks, tubs,

and other wet or damp places to avoid deadly electric
shocks.

Never use or store flammable liquids (such as gasoline)
around a space heater. The flammable vapors can flow
from one part of the room to another and be ignited
by the open flame or by an electrical spark.

Coal-fired Space Heaters (Cannon Stove)

A coal stove is made entirely of cast iron. Coal on the
grates receives primary air for combustion through the
grates from the ash-door draft intake. Combustible gases
driven from the coal by heat burn in the barrel of the
stove, where they receive additional or secondary air
through the feed door. The side and top of the stove
absorb the heat of combustion and radiate it to the sur-
rounding space. Coal stoves must be vented to the flue.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 575: Oil-fired Space Heaters

Oil-fired space heaters have atmospheric vaporizing-type
burners. The burners require a light grade of fuel oil that
vaporizes easily and in comparatively low temperatures.
In addition, the oil must be such that it leaves only a
small amount of carbon residue and ash within the
heater. Oil stoves must be vented.

The burner of an oil-fired space heater consists essentially
of a bowl, 8 to 13 inches in diameter, with perforations
in the side that admit air for combustion. The upper part
of the bowl has a flame ring or collar. Figure 12.15 shows
a perforated-sleeve burner. When several space heaters are
installed in a building, an oil supply from an outside tank
to all heaters is often desirable. Figure 12.16 shows the
condition of a burner flame with different rates of fuel
flow and indicates the ideal flame height.

Electric Space Heaters
Electric space heaters do not need to be vented.

Gas-fired Space Heaters

The three types of gas-fired space heaters (natural, manu-
factured, and liquefied petroleum gas) have a similar con-
struction. All gas-fired space heaters must be vented to
prevent a dangerous buildup of poisonous gases. Each
unit console consists of an enamel steel cabinet with top
and bottom circulating grilles or openings, gas burners,
heating elements, gas pilot, and a gas valve. The heating
element or combustion chamber is usually cast iron.

Caution: All gas-fired space heaters and their connections
must be approved by the American Gas Association
(AGA). They must be
installed in accordance
with the recommenda-
tions of that organiza-
tion or the local code.

Venting

Use of proper venting
materials and correct
installation of venting

ers is necessary to min-

condensation and to
ensure that combustion
products are carried
off. (Approximately 12
gallons of water are
produced in the burn-

Figure 12.15. Perforated-sleeve Burner

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

for gas-fired space heat-

imize harmful effects of

ing of 1,000 cubic feet of natural gas. The inner surface
of the vent must therefore be heated above the dew point
of the combustion products to prevent water from form-
ing in the flue.) A horizontal vent must be given an
upward pitch of at least 1 inch per foot of horizontal
distance.

When the smoke pipe extends through floors or walls,
the metal pipe must be insulated from the floor or wall
system by an air space (Figure 12.17). Sharp bends
should be avoided. A 9° vent elbow has a resistance to
flow equivalent to that of a straight section of pipe with a
length 10 times the elbow diameter. Be sure that vents are
of rigid construction and resistant to corrosion by flue gas
products. Several types of venting material are available
such as B-vent and other ceramic-type materials. A chim-
ney lined with firebrick type of terra cotta must be
relined with an acceptable vent material if it is to be used
for venting gas-fired appliances.

The same size vent pipe should be used throughout its
length. A vent should never be smaller than the heater
outlet except when two or more vents converge from sep-
arate heaters. To determine the size of vents beyond the
point of convergence, one-half the area of each vent
should be added to the area of the largest heater’s vent.
Vents should be installed with male ends of inner liner
down to ensure condensate is kept within pipes on a cold
start. The vertical length of each vent or stack should be
at least 2 feet greater than the length between horizontal
connection and stack. Remember that the more conduc-
tive the unit, the lower the temperature of combustion
and the more byproducts of combustion are likely to be

ql

MEDIUM
2. FLAME AT MEDIUM FIRE

HOTFLUEGAS

MINIMUM
3. FLAME AT MINIMUM, OR LOW FIRE

HIGH
1. FLAME AT HIGH FIRE

TOO LOW
4. FLAME WHEN OIL FLOW |5 100 LOW.

Figure 12.16. Condition of Burner Flame with Different Rates of Fuel Flow [4]

Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating 12-13



Page 576: produced. These by-products are sometimes referred to as
soot and creosote. These by-products will build up in
vents, stacks, and chimneys. They are extremely flamma-
ble and can result in fire in these units that is hot enough
to penetrate the heat shielding and throw burning mate-
rial onto the roof of the home.

The vent should be run at least 3 feet above any projec-
tion within 20 feet of the building to place it above a
possible pressure zone due to wind currents (Figure
12.18). A weather cap should prevent entrance of rain
and snow. Gas-fired space heaters, as well as gas furnaces
and water heaters, must be equipped with a backdraft
diverter (Figure 12.19) to protect heaters against down-
drafts and excessive updrafts. Only draft diverters
approved by the AGA should be used.

The combustion chamber or firebox must be insulated
from the floor, usually with airspace of 15 to 18 inches.
The firebox is sometimes insulated within the unit and
thus allows for lesser clearance firebox combustibles.

Floors should be protected where coal space heaters are
located. The floor protection allows hot coals and ashes
to cool off if dropped while being removed from the ash
chamber. Noncombustible walls and materials should be
used when they are exposed to heated surfaces. For space
heaters, a top or ceiling clearance of 36 inches, a wall
clearance of 18 inches, and a smoke pipe clearance of 18
inches are recommended.

Hydronic Systems

Hydronic (circulating water) systems involving traditional
baseboards can be single-pipe or two-pipe. Radiant sys-
tems are also an option. All hydronic systems require an
expansion tank to compensate for the increase in water
volume when it is heated (i.e., the volume of 50°F [10°C]

13/4" clearance

if the. fire ey
PLASTER
FLUE LINING

SMOKE PIPE
FLOOR

PLASTER
if thr. fire rated
9” clearance

F 3— VENT HOLES
METAL THIMBLE

FRAME PARTITION

FLUE CONNECTIONS AND CLEARANCES

CLEARANCE REDUCTION

PROTECTED CONSTRUCTION
MATERIAL Mire rating

20 MINUTES.
30 MINUTES

45 MINUTES

60 MINUTES

Figure 12.17. Wall and Ceiling Clearance Reduction [4]

12-14 Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating

water increases almost 4% when it is heated to 200°F
[93°C]). Single-pipe hydronic systems are most com-
monly used in residences. They use a single pipe with hot
water flowing in a series loop from radiator to radiator.
Massachusetts has a prototype set of hydronic systems
requirements [11].

The drawback to this arrangement is that the temperature
of the water decreases as it moves through each radiator.
Thus, larger radiators are needed for those locations
downstream in the loop. A common solution to this is
multiple loops or zones. Each zone has its own tempera-
ture control with circulation provided by a small pump or
zone valve in each loop. Two-pipe hydronic systems use a
pipe for supplying hot water to the radiators and a second
pipe for returning the water from the radiators to the
boiler.

There are also direct- and reverse-return arrangements.
The direct-return system can be difficult to balance
because the pressure drop through the nearest radiator
piping can be significantly less than for the farthest
radiator. Reverse-return systems take care of the balancing
problem, but require the expense of additional piping.
Orifice plates at radiator inlets or balancing valves at
radiator outlets can also be used to balance the pressure
drops in a direct-return system.

Direct Vent Wall Furnaces

Direct vent wall furnaces are specifically designed for
areas where flues or chimneys are not available or cannot
be used. The furnace is directly vented to the outside and
external air is used to support combustion. The air on the
inside is warmed as it recirculates around a sealed
chamber.

Cooling

Air Conditioning

Many old homes relied on passive cooling-opening win-
dows and doors and using shading devices-during the

summer months. Homes were designed with windows on
opposite walls to encourage cross ventilation and large

HIGH BUILDING
OR TREE

LESSTHAN
20'-0'

Figure 12.18. Draft Relation to Height of Chimney [4]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 577: shade trees reduced solar heat gains. This approach is still
viable, and improved thermal performance (insulating
value) windows are available that allow for larger window
areas to let in more air in the summer without the heat
loss penalty in the winter. However, increased outdoor
noise levels, pollution, and security issues make relying on
open windows a less attractive option in some locations
today.

An air conditioning system of some kind may be installed
in the home. It may be a window air conditioner or
through-the-wall unit for cooling one or two rooms, or a
central split-system air conditioner or heat pump. In any
event, the performance of these systems, in terms of pro-
viding adequate comfort without excessive energy use,
should be investigated. The age of the equipment alone
will provide some indication. If the existing system is
more than 10 years old, replacement should be consid-
ered because it is much less efficient than today’s systems
and nearing the end of its useful life.

The refrigerant commonly used in today’s residential air
conditioners is R-22. Because of the suspicion that R-22
depletes the ozone layer, manufacturers will be prohibited
from producing units with R-22 in 2010. The leading
replacements for R-22 are R-134A and R-410A, and new
products are now available with these nonozone-depleting
refrigerants.

The performance measure for electric air conditioners
with capacities less than 65,000 BTU is the seasonal
energy efficiency ratio (SEER). SEER is a rating of cool-
ing performance based on representative residential loads.
It is reported in units of BTU of cooling per watt per
hour of electric energy consumption. It includes energy
used by the unit’s compressor, fans, and controls. The
higher the SEER, the more efficient the system. However,
the highest SEER unit may not provide the most com-

FLUE LINING

FLUE |

gee — MIXING AIF

HOT WATER HEATER
GAS

SMOKE PIPE

AIR SPACE

KF

HOT FURNACE

Figure 12.19. Location and Operation of Typical Backdraft Diverter [4]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

fort. In humid climates, some of the highest SEER units
exhibit poor dehumidification capability because they
operate at higher evaporator temperatures to attain the
higher efficiency. A SEER of at least 10 is required by the
National Appliance Energy Conservation Act of 1987 for
conventional central split-system air-cooled systems. The
Department of Energy announced a SEER of 13 effective
January 2006.

Cooling system options vary widely, depending on the
level of control and comfort desired by the homeowner.
Fans can increase circulation and reduce cooling loads,
but they may be unsatisfactory in hot climates because
their cooling capability is directly limited by outdoor
conditions. Radiant barriers can reduce cooling loads in
very hot climates. Evaporative coolers can be a relatively
inexpensive and effective method of cooling in dry cli-
mates, such as the Southwest. Electric air conditioning
maintains a comfortable indoor temperature and humid-
ity even under the most severe outdoor conditions. More
than 75% of new homes in the United States are
equipped with some form of central air conditioning:
50% of the homes in the Northeast, 75% in the
Midwest, 95% in the South, and approximately 60% in
the West. Electric air conditioning removes moisture
from the air and reduces its temperature. It can be a good
investment because, in most parts of the country, the pay-
back is significant when the house is sold.

Electric air conditioners that use the vapor-compression,
refrigeration cycle are available in a variety of sizes and
configurations, ranging from small window units to large
central systems. The most common form of central air
conditioning is a split-system with a warm air furnace
(Figure 12.20). The same ductwork is used for distribut-
ing conditioned air during the heating and cooling sea-
sons. Supply air is cooled and dehumidified as it passes
over an A-shaped evaporator coil. The liquid refrigerant
evaporates inside the coil as it absorbs heat from the air.
The refrigerant gas then travels through refrigerant piping
to the outdoor unit, where it is pressurized in an electri-
cally driven compressor, raising its temperature and pres-
sure, and returned to a liquid state in the condenser as it
releases, or dumps, the heat to the outdoors. A fan draws
outdoor air in over the condenser coil. The use of two-
speed indoor fans can be advantageous in this type of
system because the cooling load often requires higher air-
flows than the heating load. The lower speed can be used
for the heating season and for improved dehumidification
performance during the cooling season. The condenser
unit for a house air conditioner is shown in Figure 12.21.

Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating 12-15



Page 578: Circulation Fans

Air movement can make a person feel comfortable even
when dry-bulb temperatures are elevated. A circulation
fan (ceiling or portable) that creates an airspeed of 150 to
200 feet per minute can compensate for a 4°F (-16°C)
increase in temperature.

Ceiling circulation fans also can be beneficial in the
heating season by redistributing warm air that collects
along the ceiling, but they can be noisy.

Evaporation Coolers

In dry climates, as in the southwestern United States, an
evaporative cooler or “swamp” cooler may provide suffi-
cient cooling. This system cools an airstream by evaporat-
ing water into it; the airstream’s relative humidity
increases while the dry-bulb temperature decreases. A
95°F (35°C), 15% relative humidity airstream can be
conditioned to 75°F (24°C), 50% relative humidity. The
simplest direct systems are centrally located and use a
pump to supply water to a saturated pad over which the
supply air is blown. Indirect systems use a heat exchanger
between the airstream that is cooled by evaporating water
and the supply airstream. The moisture level of the sup-
ply airstream is not affected as it is cooled.

Evaporation coolers have lower installation and operating
costs than electric air conditioning. No ozone-depleting
refrigerant is involved. They provide high levels of venti-
lation because they typically condition and supply 100%
outside air.

Figure 12.20. Split-system Air Conditioner

12-16 Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating

The disadvantages are that bacterial contamination can
result if not properly maintained and they are only appro-
priate for dry, hot climates.

Safety

Cooling homes with window air conditioners requires
attention to the maintenance requirements of the unit.
The filter must be cleaned or replaced as recommended
by the manufacturer, and the drip pan should be checked
to ensure that proper drainage from the unit is occurring.
The pans should be rinsed and disinfected as recom-
mended by the manufacturer. Both bacteria and fungi

can establish themselves in these areas and present serious
health hazards.

Condensation forms on the cooling coils of central air
units inside and outside the home. These units should
have a properly installed drip pan and should be drained
according to the manufacturer's instructions. They also
should receive routine maintenance, flushing, and disin-
fection. In the spring, before starting the air conditioner,
the unit should be checked by a professional or someone
familiar with the operation of the system. This is a good
time to check drip line(s) for conditions such as plugs,
cracks, or bacterial contamination because many of these
lines are plastic. The drip pan should be cleaned thor-
oughly and disinfected if necessary or replaced. A plugged
drip line can cause water damage by overflow from the
drip pan. In the fall, the heat unit also should be checked
before starting the system. Care should be taken with
both window air conditioning units and central air sys-
tems to use quality air filters that are designed for the
specific units and meet the specifications required by the
system’s manufacturer.

Figure 12.21. External Air-conditioning Condenser Unit

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 579: The housing inspector should be on the alert for
unvented, open flame heaters. Coil-type, wall-mounted
water heaters that do not have safety relief valves are not
permitted. Kerosene (portable) units for cooking or heat-
ing should be prohibited. Generally, open-flame portable

units are not allowed under fire safety regulations.

In oil heating units, other than integral tank units, the oil
must be filled and vented outside the building. Filling oil
within buildings is prohibited. Cutoff switches should be
close to the entry but outside of a boiler room.

Chimneys

Chimneys (Figure 12.22) are often an integral part of a
building. Masonry chimneys must be tight and sound;

flues should be terra cotta-lined; and, where no linings

are installed, the brick should be tight to permit proper
draft and elimination of combustion gases.

Chimneys that act as flues for gas-fired equipment must
be lined with either B vent or terra cotta. When a portion
of the chimney above the roof either loses insulation or
the insulation peels back, it indicates potential poisonous
gas release or water leakage problems and a need for
rebuilding. Exterior deterioration of the chimney, if
neglected too long, will permit erosion from within the
flues and eventually block the flue opening.

Rusted flashing at the roof level will also contribute to
the chimney’s deterioration. Efflorescence on the inside
wall of the chimney below the roof and on the outside of
the chimney, if exposed, will show salt accumulations—a
telltale sign of water penetration and flue gas escape and a
sign of chimney deterioration. During rainy seasons, if
terra cotta chimneys leak, dark areas show the number of
flues inside the masonry chimney so they can actually be
counted. When this condition occurs, it usually requires
2 or 3 months to dry out. After drying out, the mortar
joints are discolored (brown). After a few years of this
type of deterioration, the joints can be distinguished
whether the chimney is wet or dry. These conditions usu-
ally develop when coal is used and become more pro-
nounced 2 to 5 years after conversion to oil or gas.

An unlined chimney can be checked for deterioration
below the roofline by looking for residue deposited at the
base of the chimney, usually accessible through a cleanout
(door or plug) or breaching. Red granular or fine powder
showing through coal or oil soot will generally indicate, if
in quantity (a handful), that deterioration is excessive and
repairs are needed.

Unlined chimneys with attached gas units will be devoid
of soot, but will usually show similar telltale brick powder

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

and deterioration. Manufactured gas has a greater ten-
dency to dehydrate and decompose brick in chimney
flues than does natural gas. For gas installations in older
homes, utility companies usually specify chimney require-
ments before installation; therefore, older chimneys may
require the installation of terra cotta liners, nonlead-lined
copper liners, stainless steel liners, or transit pipe. Black
carbon deposits around the top of the chimney usually
indicate an oil burner operation using a low air ratio and
high oil consumption. Prolonged operation in this burner
setting results in long carbon water deposits down the
chimney for 4 to 6 feet or more and should indicate to
the inspector a possibility of poor burner maintenance.
This will accent the need to be more thorough on the
next inspection. This type of condition can result from
other causes, such as improper chimney height, or exte-
rior obstructions, such as trees or buildings, that will
cause downdrafts or insufficient draft or contribute to a
faulty heating operation. Rust spots and soot-mold usu-
ally occur on deteriorated galvanized smoke pipe.

Fireplaces

Careful attention should be given to construction of the
fireplace (Figure 12.23). Improperly built fireplaces are a
serious safety and fire hazard. The most common causes
of fireplace fires are thin walls, combustible materials
such as studding or trim against sides and back of the
fireplace, wood mantels, and unsafe hearths.

Fireplace walls should be no less than 8 inches thick; if
built of stone or hollow masonry units, they should be no
less than 12 inches thick. The faces of all walls exposed to
fire should be lined with firebrick or other suitable fire-
resistant material. When the lining consists of 4 inches of

FLUE LINING FLUE LINING
FLASHING FLASHING
ROOF
FLUE LINING
COUNTER

FLASHING

FLASHING

SECTION

Sh FLUE LINING

Figure 12.22. Chimney Plan [4]

Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating 12-17



Page 580: firebrick, such lining thickness may be included in the
required minimum thickness of the wall.

The fireplace hearth should be constructed of brick,
stone, tile, or similar incombustible material and should
be supported on a fireproof slab or on a brick arch. The
hearth should extend at least 20 inches beyond the chim-
ney breast and no less than 12 inches beyond each side of
the fireplace opening along the chimney breast. The com-
bined thickness of the hearth and its supporting construc-
tion should be no less than 6 inches at any point.

It is important that all wooden beams, joists, and studs
are set off from the fireplace and chimney so that there is
no less than 2 inches of clearance between the wood
members and the sidewalls of the fireplace or chimney
and no less than 4 inches of clearance between wood
members and the back wall of the fireplace.

A gas-log set is primarily a decorative appliance. It
includes a grate holding ceramic logs, simulated embers, a
gas burner, and a variable flame controller. These sets can

SECOND FLOOR

SS

JOIST YO
] MASONRY
y
Y
Z
MW
DAMPER V7 7— SMOKE SHELF

Da

SS;

Me

HEARTH

a FIRE BRICK

FIRST FLOOR
INSULATION
joist —

WOOD CRIBBING
(Must be removed before ysing )
fire hozard

FOOTING

Figure 12.23. Fireplace Construction [4]

12-18 Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating

be installed in most existing fireplaces. There are two
principal types: vented and unvented. Vented types
require a chimney flue for exhausting the gases. They are
only 20% to 30% efficient; and most codes require that
the flue be welded open, which results in an easy exit
path for heated room air. Unvented types operate like the
burner on a gas stove and the combustion products are
emitted into the room. They are more efficient because
no heat is lost up the flue and most are equipped with
oxygen-depletion sensors. However, unvented types are
banned in some states, including Massachusetts and
California. Gas fireplaces incorporate a gas-log set into a
complete firebox unit with a glass door. Some have built-
in dampers, smoke shelves, and heat-circulating features
that allow them to provide both radiant and convective
heat. Units can have push-button ignition, remote con-
trol, variable heat controls, and thermostats. Gas fire-
places are more efficient than gas logs, with efficiencies of
60% to 80%. Many draw combustion air in from the
outside and are direct vented, eliminating the need for a
chimney. Some of these units are wall-furnace rated.
There are also electric fireplaces that provide the ambi-
ence of a fire and, if desired, a small amount of resistance
heat. These units have no venting requirements. The
advantages are that there are no ashes or flying sparks that
occur with wood-burning fireplaces. They are not affected
by wood-burning bans imposed in some areas when air
quality standards are not met. Direct-vented gas or elec-
tric models eliminate the need for a chimney.

The disadvantages are that the cost for equipment and
running the gas line can be high.

References

1. US Census Bureau. Rooms, number of bedrooms, and
house heating fuel: 2000. Census 2000 Summary File 4
(SF4). Washington, DC: US Census Bureau; 2000.
Available from URL: http://factfinder.census.gov
[select Data Sets, then select Census 2000 Summary
File 4 (SF 4) - Sample Data].

2. National Energy Efficiency Committee. Building: heat
pumps; application of heat pumps in Singapore.
Singapore: National Environment Agency; 2003.
Available from URL: http://www.neec.gov.sg/building/
heat_pump.shtm.

3. National Energy Efficiency Committee. Renewables:
solar energy. Singapore: National Environment Agency;
no date. Available from URL: http://www.neec.gov.sg/
renewables/solar.shtm.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 581: 10.

11s

Center for Disease Control. Basic housing inspection.
Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human Services;
1976.

Fairfax County. Fuel storage tanks. Fairfax, VA: Fairfax
County; 2004. Available from URL: http://www.co.
fairfax.va.us/dpwes/construction/fuel_tanks.htm.

Wisconsin Department of Commerce. Environmental
services—residential fuel oil and gasoline storage tanks.
Madison, WI: Wisconsin Department of Commerce;
2004. Available from URL: http://www.commerce.state.
wi.us/ER/ER-BS T-ResTk.html.

Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. FAQ:
Home heating oil tanks, Lansing, MI: Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality; no date. Available
from URL: http://www.michigan.gov/deq/0,1607,7-135-
3311_4115_4238-9379--,00.html.

US Environmental Protection Agency. Overview of the
federal underground storage tank program. Washington,
DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; no date.
Available from URL: http://www.epa.gov/swerust1/
overview.htm.

US Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Initiatives Programs. Washington, DC: US Department of
Housing and Urban Development; 2004. Available from
URL: http://www.hud.gov/oftices/cpd/energyenviron/
energy/initiatives.

US Environmental Protection Agency. Sources of indoor
air pollution—asbestos. Washington, DC: U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency; no date. Available from
URL: http://www.epa.gov/iaq/asbestos.html.

The Commonwealth of Massachusetts Board of Building
Regulations and Standards (BBRS). Hydronic system
requirements. Boston: The Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Board of Building Regulations and
Standards (BBRS); no date. Available from URL:
http://www.mass.gov/bbrs/commntry/cmpxhydr.htm.

Additional Sources of Information
McQuiston FC, Parker JD, Spitler JD. Heating, ventila-
tion, and air conditioning: analysis and design. 5th ed.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.; 2000.

Kittle JL. Home heating and air conditioning systems.
New York: McGraw-Hill; 1990.

Pita EG. Air conditioning principles and systems: an
energy approach. 4th ed. New York: Prentice Hall; 2001.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating

12-19



Page 582: 12-20 Chapter 12: Heating, Air Conditioning, and Ventilating Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 583: Chapter 13: Energy Efficiency

“Engineering is the science of economy, of conserving the
energy, kinetic and potential, provided and stored up by
nature for the use of man. It is the business of engineering to
utilize this energy to the best advantage, so that there may be
the least possible waste.”

William A. Smith
1908

Introduction

Using energy efficiently can reduce the cost of heating,
ventilating, and air-conditioning, which account for a sig-
nificant part of the overall cost of housing. Energy costs
recur month-to-month and are hard to reduce after a
home has been designed and built. The development of
an energy-efficient home or building must be thought
through using a systems approach. Planning for energy
efficiency involves considering where the air is coming
from, how it is treated, and where it is desired in the
home. Improper use or installation of sealing and insulat-
ing materials may lead to moisture saturation or reten-
tion, encouraging the growth of mold, bacteria, and
viruses. In addition, toxic chemicals may be created or
contained within the living environment. These building
errors may result in major health hazards. The major
issues that must be balanced in using a systems approach
to energy efficiency are energy cost and availability, long-
term affordability and sustainability, comfort and effi-
ciency, and health and safety.

Energy Systems

Making sound decisions in designing, constructing, or
updating dwellings will ensure not only greater use and
enjoyment of the space, but also can significantly lower
energy bills and help residents avoid adverse health
effects. Systematic planning for energy efficiency also can
assist prospective homeowners in qualifying for mortgages
because lower fuel bills translate into lower total housing
and utility payments. Some banks and credit unions take
this into account when qualifying prospective homeown-
ers for mortgages. “Energy-efficient” mortgages provide
buyers with special benefits when purchasing an energy-
efficient home.

Energy use and efficiency should be addressed in the con-
text of selection of fuel types and appliances, location of
the equipment, equipment sizing and backup systems,
and programmed use when making decisions on space

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

heating, water heating, space cooling, window glazing,
and lighting. Usage variables, such as taking excessively
long showers, turning off lights when leaving rooms, or
using appliances at full or near-full capacity, may increase
or decrease energy use, depending on occupancy. Many of
these demands can be optimized in the design stage of
housing for new construction. However, when remodel-
ing dwellings, making modifications to improve energy
efficiency is often difficult. Preconstruction consultations
with architects and energy specialists can produce trade-
offs that retain the aesthetics and special aspects of a
dwelling, while making appropriate investments in energy
efficiency.

A price is paid for poor design and lack of proper insula-
tion of dwellings, both in dollars for utility bills and in
comfort of the occupants. The layout of rooms and over-
all tightness of a house in terms of air exchange affect
energy requirements. In addition, home occupants and
owners often are called on to make relatively minor deci-
sions affecting total energy consumption, such as select-
ing lighting fixtures and bulbs and selecting settings for
thermostats. Buying energy-efficient appliances can save
energy, but the largest reduction in energy use can be
derived from major decisions, such as considering the
R-value of roof systems, insulation, and windows.

R-values

Thermal resistance (a material’s resistance to heat flow) is
rated by R-value. Higher R values mean greater insulating
power, which means greater household energy savings and
commensurate cost savings. Table 13.1 is a guideline for
choosing R-values that are right for a particular home
based on the climate, household heating system, and area
in which it is located.

Another way of understanding R-value is to see it as the
resistance to heat losses from a warmer inside temperature
to the outside temperature through a material or building
envelope (wall, ceiling or roof assembly, or window).
Total heat loss is a function of the thermal conductivity
of materials, area, time, and construction in a house.

The R-value of thermal insulation depends on the type of
material, its thickness, and its density. In calculating the
R-value of a multilayered installation, the R-values of the
individual layers are added. Installing more insulation
increases R-value and the resistance to heat flow.

Chapter 13: Energy Efficiency 13-1



Page 584: Insulate to these levels in the...

And a heat-
ing an
that is..

In a climate that is... Ceiling

Warm, with cooling and minimal
heating requirements [f]

Electric
resistance

Ducts [e] in

unheated/uncoole
Basement

or crawl
space walls
Floor [d]

Wood-
frame
wall [c]

Basement or

Attic crawl space

Gas/oil or R-22 to R-11 to | R-11 to R-11 to R- sl to

None to R-4

Gas/oil or
heat pump

Electric
resistance

Mixed, with moderate heating
and cooling requirements [g]

R-2 to R-8

R-2 to R-8

Cold, with mainly heating
requirements [h]

Gas/oil

Heat pump
or electric
resistance

R-2 to R-11

R-6 to

Rea | R-2 to R-11

a. Adapted from the U.S. Department of Energy 1997 Insulation Fact Sheet available at (800)-DOE-EREC and Modera et al., Impact of Residential Duct
Insulation on HVAC Energy Use and Life Cycle Cost to Consumers, ASHRAE Transactions 96-13-4.

> erpane

. Insulation is also effective at reducing cooling bills. These levels assume your house has electric air conditioning.

R-values may be achieved through a combination of cavity insulation and rigid board insulation and are for insulation only (not whole wall).

. Do not insulate crawl space walls if crawl space is wet or ventilated with outdoor air.

Use the lower R-value for return ducts and higher R-value for supply ducts.

Florida and Hawaii; coastal California; southeast Texas; southern Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Louisiana, and Mississippi.

. Idaho, Kentucky, Missouri, Nebraska, Oklahoma, Oregon, Virginia, Washington, and West Virginia; southern Indiana, Kansas, New Mexico, and Arizona;
northern Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Louisiana, and Mississippi; inland California; and western Nevada.

. Great Lakes area, mountainous areas [e.g., Colorado, Wyoming, Utah, etc.]), New England, New York, northern Midwest, and Pennsylvania.

Table 13.1. Cost-effective Insulation R-values for Existing Homes [a;1]

The effectiveness of an insulated wall or ceiling also
depends on how and where the insulation is installed. For
example, insulation that is compressed will not provide its
full rated R-value. Also, the overall R-value of a wall or
ceiling will be somewhat different from the R-value of the
insulation itself because some heat flows around the insu-
lation through the studs and joists. That is, the overall
R-value of a wall with insulation between wood studs is
less than the R-value of the insulation itself because the
wood provides a thermal short-circuit around the insula-
tion. The short-circuiting through metal framing is much
greater than that through wood-framed walls; sometimes
the metal wall’s overall R-value can be as low as half the
insulation’s R-value. With careful design, this short-circu-
iting can be reduced.

Roofs

Roofs are composite structures, with composite R-values.
The total R-value for the roof components shown in
Figure 13.1 is 14.54 (Table 13.2). In general, a composite
structure with a composite R-value of more than R-38

13-2 Chapter 13: Energy Efficiency

provides a substantial barrier to heat loss. Of course, in the
winter the outside air temperature would vary significantly
between locations such as Pensacola, Florida, and
Fairbanks, Alaska, and would affect the cost-effectiveness
of additional insulation and construction using various
roofing components (Table 13.2).

The location of a house is usually a fixed variable in
calculating R-values once the lot is purchased. However,
the homeowner should consider the value of additional
insulation by comparing its cost with the savings resulting
from the increase in energy efficiency. Roof construction,
including components such as ridge vents and insulating
materials, is quite important and is often one of the more
cost-effective ways to lower energy costs.

Ridge Vents

Ridge vents are important to roofs for at least three rea-
sons. First, ridge vents help lower the temperature in the
roof structure and, consequently, in the attic and in the
habitable space below. Second, ridge vents and rotating
turbine vents help prolong the life of the roofing materials,

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 585: eee Dts Air Film

Smooth-Surfaced In Winter
—

Built-Up Root

PSSST 4 9/4" Coverboard
Insulation

/ \ } \ +— Sleel Deck

Figure 13.1. Roof Components [2]

2” Polyisocyanurate
Insulation

Inside Air Film —*

particularly asphalt shingles and plywood sheathing.
Third, ridge vents assist in air circulation and help avoid
problems with excessive moisture.

Fan-powered Attic Ventilation

Attic ventilators are small fans that remove hot air and
reduce attic temperature. Adequate inlet vents are
important. Typically these vents are located under the
eaves of the house. The fan should be located near the
peak of the roof for best performance.

White Roof Surface

White roof surfaces combined with any of the measures
isted above will improve their performance significantly.
The white surface reflects much of the sun’s heat and
keeps the roof much cooler than a typical roof.

Insulation

Insulation forms a barrier to the outside elements. It can
help ensure that occupants are comfortable and that the
home is energy-efficient. Ceiling insulation improves
comfort and cuts electricity or natural gas costs for
heating and cooling. For instance, the use of R-19
insulation in houses in Hawaii [3] could have the
following results:

¢ Reduce indoor air temperature by 4°F (-16°C) in the
afternoon.

Component
Inside air film

Steel deck

2-inch polyisocyanurate (5.56 x 2)

34-inch perlite (2.78 x 0.75)
Smooth built-up roof
Outside air film in winter
Total

Table 13.2. Potential Effects of Radiant Barriers [3]

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

° Lower the ceiling temperature, perhaps by more than
15°F (-9.4°C). Insulation [radiant barrier] can reduce
ceiling temperatures from 101°F (38°C) in bright sun
on Oahu to 83°F (28°C). (Figure 13.2).

© Reduce or eliminate the need for an air-conditioner.

Energy savings, of course, will vary depending on energy
prices. The payback afforded by additional insulation or
investment in energy conservation measures is the average
amount of time it will require for the initial capital cost
to be recovered as a result of the savings in energy bills. A
payback of 3 to 5 years might be economic, because the
average homeowner stays in a home that long. However,
payback criteria can vary by individual, and renters, for
example, often face the dilemma of not wanting to make
improvements for which they may not be able to fully
realize the benefits. Described below are a few insulation
alternatives.

To achieve maximum effect, the method of installation
and type of insulation are of considerable importance.
The proper placement of moisture barriers is essential. If
insulation becomes moisture-saturated, its resistance to
energy loss is significantly reduced. Barriers to moisture
should be installed toward the living area because signifi-
cant moisture is generated in the home through respira-
tion, cooking, and the combustion of heating fuels.

Cellulose or fiberglass insulation is the most cost-effec-
tive insulation. Blown-in cellulose or fiberglass and fiber-
glass batts are similar in cost and performance. Recycled
cellulose insulation may be available. For the best perfor-
mance, insulation should be 5 to 6 inches thick. It can be
installed in attics of new and existing homes. It is typi-
cally the best choice for framed ceilings in new homes,
but can be costly to install in existing framed ceilings. It
is very important that this type of insulation be treated
for fire resistance.

Foamboard (R-10, 1.5 to 2 inches) provides more insula-
tion per inch than does cellulose or fiberglass, but is also
more expensive. It is best where other insulation cannot
be used, such as open-beam ceilings. It is applicable for
new construction or when roofing is replaced on an exist-
ing home. Two common materials are polystyrene and
polyisocyanurate. Polystyrene is better in moist condi-
tions, and polyisocyanurate has a higher R-value per inch.
However, some of these insulations present serious fire
spread hazards. They should be evaluated to ensure that
they are covered with fire-retardant materials and meet
local fire and building codes.

Chapter 13: Energy Efficiency 13-3



Page 586: Radiant barrier insulation is a reflective foil sheet
installed under the roof deck like regular roof sheathing.
The effectiveness of a radiant barrier (Figure 13.2)
depends on its emissivity (the relative power of the sur-
face to emit heat by radiation). In general, the shinier the
foil the better. Radiant barrier insulation cuts the amount
of heat radiated from the hot roof to the ceiling below. It
may be draped over the rafters before the roof is installed
or stapled to the underside of the rafters. The shiny side
should face downward for best performance. Some manu-
facturers claim that the radiant barrier prevents up to
97% of the sun’s heat from entering the attic.

Wall Insulation

As shown in Table 13.1, it makes sense to insulate to high
R-values in the ceiling. Insulation in walls should range
from R-11 in relatively mild climate zones to R-38 in
New England, the northern Midwest, the Great Lakes,
and the Rocky Mountain states of Colorado and Wyoming.
Insulation requirements vary within climate zones in
these states and areas as well (for instance, mountainous
areas and areas farther north may have more
heating-degree days). The same logic of installing
insulation applies to both ceilings and walls: the
insulation should provide a barrier for heat and moisture
transfer and buildup from inside the dwelling, where
temperatures will generally be in the 68°F to 72°F (20°C
to 22°C) range, compared with the much colder or hotter
temperatures outside. The key to heat loss is the
difference in temperatures and the time that the heat
transfer takes place over a given area or surface. The
choice of heating system, from gas/oil or heat pump, to
electric resistance, will also affect the payback of

13-4 Chapter 13: Energy Efficiency

additional wall insulation due to variation in energy fuel
prices. For regions identified as “cold,” careful attention
should be made in selecting energy fuel type; in
particular, a heat pump may not be a practical option.

A homeowner exploring designs and construction meth-
ods should examine the value of using structural insulated
panels. The incorporation of high levels of insulation
directly from the factory on building wall and ceiling
components makes them outstanding barriers to heat and
moisture. These integrated systems, if appropriately used,
can save substantial amounts of energy when compared.
with traditional stick-built systems using 2x4 or 2x6 lum-
ber. Also, building energy-efficient features (as well as
electrical, plumbing, and other elements) directly into the
building envelope at the factory can result in labor cost
savings over the more traditional methods of
construction.

Floor Insulation

Warm air expands and rises above surrounding cooler air.
This process of heat transfer is called convection. Warm
air, which is lighter, rises and, as it cools, falls, creating a
convection current of air. The two other processes of heat
transfer are conduction (kinetic energy transferred from
particle to particle, such as in a water- or electrically
heated floor) and radiation (radiant energy emitted in the
form of waves or particles such as in a fireplace or hot
glowing heating element). Floor insulation limits all three
modes of heat loss. A warmer floor reduces the temperature
difference that drives convection. Floor insulation also
directly impedes conduction and radiation to the colder
air below the floor.

Batt Insulation

The advantage of floor insulation lies in adding extra
R-value without a significant increase in cost. It is
cheaper to put more insulation under the floor than to
add foam sheathing or change the type of wall construc-
tion to accommodate greater insulation levels.

Like walls, floor cavities should be completely filled with
insulation-without gaps, missing insulation, or cavity
voids. Floor insulation must contact the subfloor and
both joists. In many cases, it is worth the extra cost to
buy enough insulation to fill the entire cavity.

The amount of floor insulation required by some codes
can be less than the space available. For example, an R-19
fiberglass batt is 64 inches thick. A floor framed with
2x8s is about 7% inches deep, while a 2x10 floor is 9%
inches deep. A builder following a code’s minimum insu-
lation level will leave extra space that will allow for greater

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 587: heat loss. To avoid this
situation, the batt must
be pushed up into the
cavity. With the proper
support, this can be
done. Springy metal
rods are commonly used
to hold insulation up in
the top of the floor cay-
ity. Another viable
option is the use of plas-
tic straps. Figure 13.3
shows batt insulation
improperly applied to
the floor above a crawl space or a basement.

Batt Thickness,

R-value Inches

R-19 6%
R-22 HD 5Ye
R-22 TY2

Table 13.3. Floor Insulation [5]

The thickness of typical fiberglass batts can assist the
designer and the builder in creating a floor system that
works for the occupants. Table 13.3 shows a list of
R-values, along with the associated batt thickness.
Individual brands can vary by as much as 1 inch.

Cavity Fill

According to Oikos, a commercial Web site devoted to
serving professionals whose work promotes sustainable
design and construction, “Buying a thicker batt may be a
better option than trying to lift a thinner batt into the
proper position. Material costs will climb slightly but
labor should be the same. Attaching the insulation sup-
port to the bottom of the floor joist will be easier. It
could also lead to a higher quality job because there is less
chance for compression or gaps” (Figure 13.4) [4].

Figure 13.3. Common Floor Insulation Flaws [4.] Two common flaws in
floor insulation are gaps above the batt and compression of the batt in
the cavity.

Source: Reprinted from Energy Source Builder 38 with permission of Iris
Communications, Inc., publisher of Oikos.com.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

In some areas, it’s common to hang plastic mesh over
floor joists. Installers drop the insulation onto the mesh
before the subfloor is installed. However, hanging the
mesh creates sagging bellies. Insulation compresses near
the framing and sags in the middle. Mesh should be
attached to the bottom of the floor framing [4].

Each stage of increased floor insulation, from R-19 to
R-30 or R-30 to R-38, can save energy over the life of the
house. This energy translates into energy savings that are
multiples of the initial installation costs. Floor insulation
will generate the greatest savings in colder climates; in
moderate climates, the target insulation level should
depend on economics.

Blow-In Insulation

A blown-in insulation system allows the builder or insula-
tor to fill the entire cavity completely, even around pipes,
wires and other appurtenances. Using well-trained install-
ers will pay dividends in quality workmanship.

Doors

Today there is an endless variety of doors, ranging from
metal doors with or without insulation to hollow core to
solid wood. When properly installed into fitted frames,
doors serve as a heat barrier to maintain indoor tempera-
tures. Quality metal doors with insulation are best if they
have a thermal break between the interior and exterior
metal surfaces; this keeps heat from being transferred
from one side to the other.

Standard Doors

Because doors take up a small percentage of a wall,
insulating them is not as high a priority as is insulating
walls and ceilings. That said, heat loss follows the path of
least resistance; therefore, doors should be selected that
are functional and add to the energy-efficiency of the
house. Doors usually have lower R-values than the
surrounding wall.

Storm doors can add R-1 to R-2 to the existing door’s
R-value. They are a valuable addition to doors that are
frequently used and those that are exposed to cold winds,
snow, and other weather. Screens allow natural breezes to
circulate air from outside, rather than totally relying on
air-conditioning, which can be energy intensive.

When considering replacement doors, select insulated,
metal foam-core doors. Besides insulation, metal doors
provide good security, seal more tightly, tend to warp less.
Metal doors also are more soundproof than conventional
wood doors.

Chapter 13: Energy Efficiency 13-5



Page 588: Figure 13.4a. Insulation Cavity Fill [4]. Figure 13.4b. Insulation Cavity Fill [4].
Lath provides a sturdy support for insulation. Metal rods are available through insulation distributors. They are easy to
use, but insulation has to be compressed in the middle.

Figure 13.4c. Insulation Cavity Fill [4]. Figure 13.4d. Insulation Cavity Fill [4].
Mesh should be attached to the bottom of the framing. Draping the Polypropylene twine resists rot, mildew, rodents, and other dangers. It is
mesh over the joists leads to compression that reduces insulating value. to be stapled every 12 to 18 inches.

Source: Reprinted from Energy Source Builder 38 with permission of Iris Communications, Inc., publisher of Oikos.com.

Sliding Glass Doors installed in a manner that does not trap moisture or allow
Although sliding glass doors have aesthetic appeal, they unintended introduction of air. Numerous types of sealing
have very low R-values and hence are minimally energy materials are available that range from foam to plastic, to

efficient. To improve the energy efficiency of existing slid- metal flanging and magnetic strips.
ing glass doors, the homeowner should ensure that they

seal tightly and are properly weather-stripped. Hot Water Systems
Additionally, heavy insulated drapes with weights, which The hot water tank can be insulated to make it more effi-
impede the airflow, can cut down on heat loss through cient, unless the heat loss is used within the space where it
sliding glass doors. is located. Special insulation is available for this type of
appliance, and insulating it will reduce the energy required
Door Installation to deliver the hot water needed by the occupants of the
Doors must be installed as recommended by the manu- dwelling. Of course, any pipe that is subject to extreme
facturer. Care must be taken to be sure that doors are temperatures also should be insulated to decrease heat loss.

13-6 Chapter 13: Energy Efficiency Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 589: Windows

Windows by nature are transparent. They allow occu-
pants of a dwelling to see outside and bring in sunlight
and heat from the sun. They make space more pleasant
and often provide lighting for tasks undertaken in the
space. Especially in the winter, these desirable characteris-
tics offset the heat loss. Heat gain in the summer through
windows can be undesirable.

Rather than give them up, it is important to use windows
prudently and to keep energy considerations in mind in
their design and their insulating characteristics (air, glass,
plastic, or gas filler). Good design takes advantage of day
lighting. Weather-stripping and sealing leaks around win-
dows can enhance comfort and energy savings. Energy
Star windows are highly recommended. Housekeeping
measures can improve the efficiency of retaining heat.
Heat loss follows the path of least resistance: caulking,
weather-stripped framing, and films can help. These mea-
sures are relatively labor intensive, low to very low in cost,
and can be quite satisfying to the homeowner if accom-
plished correctly. On the other hand, it is not easy find-
ing the perfect materials or even replacement parts for old
windows.

When working with older windows, remember that there
is the risk for leaded paint and the dispersion of toxic
lead dust into the work area. Please refer to the lead sec-
tion of Chapter 5, Indoor Air Pollutants and Toxic
Materials.

Caulking and Weather-Stripping

According to the U.S. Department of Energy, caulking
and weather-stripping have substantial housekeeping
benefits in preventing energy loss or unwanted heat gain.

Caulking

Caulks are airtight compounds (usually latex or silicone)
that fill cracks and holes. Before applying new caulk, old
caulk or paint residue remaining around a window should
be removed using a putty knife, stiff brush, or special sol-
vent. After old caulk is removed, new caulk can then be
applied to all joints in the window frame and the joint
between the frame and the wall. The best time to apply
caulk is during dry weather when the outdoor tempera-
ture is above 45°F (7.2°C). Low humidity is important
during application to prevent cracks from swelling with
moisture. Warm temperatures are also necessary so the
caulk will set properly and adhere to the surface [5].

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Weather-stripping

Weather-stripped frames are narrow pieces of metal,
vinyl, rubber, felt, or foam that seal the contact area
between the fixed and movable sections of a window
joint. They should be applied between the sash and the
frame, but should not interfere with the operation of the
window [6].

Replacing Window Frames

The heat-loss characteristics and the air tightness of a
window vary with the type and quality of the window
frame. The types of available window frames are fixed-
pane, casement, double- and single-hung, horizontal slid-
ing, hopper, and awning. Each type varies in energy
efficiency.

Correctly installed fixed-pane windows are the most air-
tight and inexpensive choice, but are not suited to places
that require ventilation. The air infiltration properties of
casement windows (which open sideways with hand
cranks), awning windows (which are similar to casement
windows but have hinges at the top), and hopper win-
dows (inverted awning windows with hinges at the bot-
tom) are moderate. Double-hung windows, which have
top and bottom sashes (the part of the window that can
slide), tend to be leaky. The advantage of the single-hung
window over the double-hung is that it tends to restrict
air leakage because there is only one moving part.
Horizontal sliding windows, though suitable for small,
narrow spaces, provide minimal ventilation and are the
least airtight.

In buildings with large older windows, there are often
weight cavity areas that hide counter balances that make
it easy to raise and lower heavy windows. These areas
should be insulated to reduce energy loss.

Tinted Windows

Another way to conserve energy is the installation of
tinted windows. Window tinting can be installed that will
both conserve energy and also prevent damaging ultravio-
let light from entering the room and potentially fading
wood surfaces, fabrics, and carpeting. Low-emissivity
coatings, called low-e coatings, are also available. These
coatings are designed for specific geographic regions.

Reducing Heat Loss and Condensation

The energy efficiency of windows is measured in terms of
their U-values (measure of the conductance of heat) or
their R-values. Besides a few highly energy-efficient

Chapter 13: Energy Efficiency 13-7



Page 590: exceptions, window R-values range from 0.9 to 3.0.
When comparing different windows, it is advisable to
focus on the following guidance for R- and U-values:

e R-and U-values are based on standards set by the
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-
Conditioning Engineers [7].

¢ R-and U-values are calculated for the entire window,
which includes the frame.

e R-and U-values represent the same style and size of
windows.

The R-value of a window in an actual house is affected by
the type of glazing material, the number of layers of glass,
the amount of space between layers and the nature of the
gas filling them, the heat-conducting properties of the
frame and spacer materials, and the airtightness associated
with manufacturing.

For windows, rating and approval by the National
Fenestration Rating Council or equivalent rating and
approval is strongly recommended [8].

Please refer to the window section of Chapter 6, Housing
Structure.

Glazing

Glazing refers to cutting and fitting windowpanes into
frames. Glass has been traditionally the material of choice
for windowpanes, but that is changing. Several new mate-
rials are available that can increase the energy efficiency of
windows. These include the following:

° Low-emissivity (low-e) glass uses a surface coating to
minimize transmission of heat through the window by
reflecting 40% to 70% of incident heat while letting
full light pass through the pane.

° Heat-absorbing glass is specially tinted to absorb
approximately 45% of the incoming solar energy;
some of this energy passes through the pane.

° Reflective glass has a reflective film that reduces heat
gain by reflecting most of the incident solar radiation.

* Plastic glazing materials such as acrylic,
polycarbonate, polyester, polyvinyl fluoride, and
polyethylene are stronger, lighter, cheaper, and easier to
cut than glass. However, they are less durable and tend
to be affected by the weather more than glass is.

¢ Storm windows can improve the energy efficiency of
single-pane windows. The simplest example of storm
windows would be plastic film, available in

13-8 Chapter 13: Energy Efficiency

prepackaged kits, taped to the inside of the window
frame. Because this can affect visibility and be easily
damaged, a better choice would be to attach rigid or
semirigid plastic sheets such as plexiglass, acrylic,
polycarbonate, or fiber-reinforced polyester directly to
the window frame or mounting it in channels around
the frame on the outside of the building. Care should
be taken in installation to avoid ripples or blemishes
that will affect visibility.

Layering

The insulating capacity of single-pane windows is minimal,
around R-1. Multiple layers of glass can be used to increase
the energy efficiency of windows. Double- or triple-pane
windows have air-filled or gas-filled spaces, coupled with
multiple panes that resist heat flow. The space between
the panes is critical because the air spaces that are too
wide (more than */ inch) or too narrow (less than % inch)
allow excessive heat transfer. Modern windows use inert
gases, such as argon and krypton, to fill the spaces
between panes because these gases are much more
resistant to heat flow than air is. These gas-filled
windows are more expensive than regular double-pane
windows.

¢ Frame and spacer materials may be aluminum,
wood, vinyl, fiberglass, or a combination of these
materials, such as vinyl- or aluminum-clad wood.

¢ Aluminum frames are strong and are ideal for
customized window design, but they conduct heat
and are prone to condensation. The deterioration of
these frames can be avoided by anodizing or coating.
Their thermal resistance can be boosted using
continuous strips of plastic between the interior and
exterior of the frame.

¢ Wood frames are superior to aluminum frames in
having higher R-values, tolerance to temperature
extremes, and resistance to condensation. On the
other hand, wood frames require considerable
maintenance in the form of painting or staining.
Improper maintenance can lead to rot or warping.

¢ Vinyl window frames made from polyvinyl chloride
are available in a wide range of styles and shapes, can
be easily customized, have moderate R-values, and can
be competitively priced. Large windows made of vinyl
frames are reinforced using aluminum or steel bars.
Vinyl windows should be selected only after
consideration of the concerns surrounding the use of
vinyl materials and their off-gassing characteristics.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 591: ° Fiberglass frames have the highest R-values and are
not given to warping, shrinking, swelling, rotting, or
corroding. Fiberglass is not weather-resistant, so it
should also be painted. Some fiberglass frames are
hollow; others are filled with fiberglass insulation.

¢ Spacers separating multiple windowpanes in a
window use aluminum to separate glass in multipane
windows, but it conducts heat. In addition, in cold
weather, the thermal resistance around the edge of
such a window is lower than that in the center,
allowing heat to escape and condensation to occur
along the edges.

* Polyvinyl chloride foam separators placed along the
edges of the frame reduce heat loss and condensation.
Window manufacturers use foam separators, nylon
spacers, and insulation materials such as polystyrene
and rock wool insulation between the glass panes
inside windows.

Other Options

Shades, shutters, and drapes used on windows inside the
house reduce heat loss in the winter and heat gain in the
summer. The heat gain during summer can also be minimized
by the use of awnings, exterior shutters, or screens. These
cost-effective window treatments should be considered before
deciding on window replacement. By considering orientation,
day lighting, storage of or reflection of energy from
sunshine, and materials used within the house and on the
building envelope, heat loss and gain can be decreased.

Solar Energy

Solar energy is a form of renewable energy available to
homeowners for heating, cooling, and lighting. The more
energy-efficient new structures are designed to store solar
energy. Remodeled structures may be retrofitted to
increase energy efficiency by improving insulation charac-
teristics, improving airflow and airtightness of the struc-
ture, and enhancing the ability to use solar energy. Solar
energy systems are active and passive. Whereas active solar
systems use some type of mechanical power to collect,
store, and distribute the sun’s energy, passive systems use
the materials and design elements in the structure itself.

Active Solar Systems

Active solar systems use devices to collect, convert, and
deliver solar energy. Solar collectors on roofs or other
south-facing surfaces can be used to heat water and air
and generate electricity. Active solar systems can be
installed in new or existing buildings and periodically
need to be inspected and maintained. Active solar energy

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

equipment consists of collectors, a storage tank, piping
or ductwork, fans, motors, and other hardware. Flat
panel collectors (Figure 13.5) can be placed on the roof
or on walls. Typically, the collector will be a sandwich of
one or two sheets of glass or plastic and another air
space above a metal absorber plate, which is painted
black to enhance heat absorption. After collection, when
the sun’s energy is converted to heat, a transfer is made
to a liquid storage tank. The heated liquid travels
through coils in the hot water tank, and the heat is
transferred to the water and perhaps the heating system.
Most hot water systems use a liquid collector system
because it is more efficient and less costly than an air-
type system.

In the southwest United States, solar roof ponds have
become popular for solar cooling. Evaporative cooling
systems depend on water vaporization to lower the tem-
perature of the air. These have been shown to be more
effective in dry climates than in areas with extremely

high relative humidity.

In certain climates, like those in the Hawaiian Islands,
using solar energy is cost-effective for providing hot
water. Some builders even include it as a standard fea-
ture in their homes. The total cost to the homeowner of
solar energy systems consists of the capital, operational,
and maintenance costs. The real cost of capital may be
lowered by the availability of tax credits offered at the
federal (to lower federal income taxes) and state levels.

Homeowners and builders can benefit from tax credits
because they lower the total upfront investment cost of
installing active solar systems. This is the major portion
of the total cost of using solar energy, because operation
and maintenance costs are small in comparison to initial
system costs.

Passive Solar Systems

Buildings designed to use passive solar energy have fea-
tures incorporated into their design that absorb and
slowly release the sun’s heat. In cold climates, the design
allows the light and heat of the sun to be stored in the

Figure 13.5. Solar Panels

Chapter 13: Energy Efficiency 13-9



Page 592: structure, while insulating against the cold. In warm
climates, the best effect is achieved by admitting light
while rejecting heat. A building using passive solar sys-
tems may have the following features in the floor plan:

* Large south-facing windows

¢ Small windows in other directions, particularly on the
north side of the structure

* Designs that allow daylight and solar heat to permeate
the main living areas

* Special glass to block ultraviolet radiation

*¢ Building materials that absorb and slowly reradiate the
solar heat

Structural features such as overhangs, baffles, and
summer shading to eliminate summer overheating.

Passive design can be a direct-gain system when the sun
shines directly into the building, thereby heating it and
storing this heat in the building materials (concrete, stone
floor slabs, and masonry partitions). Alternatively, it may
be an indirect gain system where the thermal mass is
located between the sun and the living space. Isolated
gain is yet another type of system that is separated from
the main living area (such as a sunroom or a solar
greenhouse), with convective loops for space conditioning
into the living space.

Energy Star is a program supported and promoted by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) that helps
individuals protect the environment through superior
energy efficiency. For the individual in his or her home,
energy-efficient choices can save families about one third
on their energy bill, with similar savings of greenhouse
gas emissions, without sacrificing features, style, or
comfort. When replacing household products, look for
ones that have earned the Energy Star; these products
meet strict energy-efficiency guidelines set by EPA and
the U.S. Department of Energy. When looking for a new
home, look for one that has earned the Energy Star
approval. If you are planning to make larger
improvements to your home, EPA offers tools and
resources to help you plan and undertake projects to
reduce your energy bills and improve home comfort [9].
In 2004 alone, Americans, with the help of Energy Star,
saved enough energy to power 24 million homes and
avoid greenhouse gas emissions equivalent to those from
20 million cars-all while saving $10 billion.

13-10 Chapter 13: Energy Efficiency

Conducting an Energy Audit

Energy audits can help identify areas where energy
investments can be made, thereby reducing energy used
in lighting, heating, cooling, or meeting other demands
of housing occupants. An inspection can evaluate the
worthiness or compliance with codes of energy-saving
measures, including accepted or written standards. For
example, if a new addition requires the equivalent of
R-19 insulation in the ceilings, this can be validated in
the inspection process. Whereas an audit is generally
informational, an inspection should validate that mate-
rials and workmanship have yielded a structure that
protects the occupants from the elements, such as rain,
snow, wind, cold, and heat. Potentially hazardous situa-
tions within a structure should be evaluated in an
inspection. The overall goal of a housing inspection in
the case of energy efficiency is to identify potential haz-
ardous conditions and help to create conditions under
which the health and welfare of the occupants can be
enhanced, rather than put at risk.

The housing inspector should be aware that there is
variation (sometimes quite significant differences) in
heating degree days or cooling loads and in relative
humidity conditions within given regions. Local and
regional topography, as well as site conditions, can
affect temperatures and moisture.

Numerous Web sites listed in this chapter’s Additional
Sources of Information section discuss the procedures
for conducting energy audits. Local and regional utili-
ties often offer audit services and assist with selecting
cost-effective conservation measures for given areas of
the United States.

References

1. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Energy star
insulation project: R-value guidelines. Berkeley, CA:
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory; 2004. Available
from URL: http://enduse.lbl.gov/Projects/Rvalue.html.

2. RoofHelp.com. R-value. Fort Worth, TX: RoofHelp;
1999. Available from URL: http://www.roofhelp.com/
Ryalue.htm.

3. State of Hawaii, Department of Business, Economic
Development, and Tourism, Energy Resources and
Technology Division. Ceiling insulation. Honolulu, HI:
State of Hawaii, Department of Business, Economic
Development, and Tourism; no date. Available from
URL: http://www.hawaii.gov/dbedt/ert/rf_insul.html.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 593: 4. Oikos. Filling a floor with batt insulation. Energy Source
Builder 1995 [Apr]; 38. Available from URL: http://oikos.
com/esb/38/floorinsulation.html.

5. US Department of Energy. Energy savers: fact sheets.
Washington, DC: US Department of Energy; no date.
Available from URL: http://www.cere.energy.gov/
consumerinfo/factsheets.html.

6. US Department of Energy. Advances in glazing materials
for windows. Washington, DC: US Department of
Energy; 1994.

7. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and
Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE). Standards; no
date. Adlanta: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating
and Air-Conditioning Engineers. Available from URL:
http://www.ashrae.org.

8. National Fenestration Rating Council. Search for energy
performance ratings. Silver Spring, MD: National
Fenestration Rating Council; no date. Available from
URL: http://www.nfrc.org/windowshop/surveybegin.aspx.

Hawaii Department of Business, Economic Development
and Tourism. Ceiling insulation. Available from URL:
http://www.state.hi.us/dbedt/ert/rf_insul.html.

National Association of State Energy Officials. Available
from URL: http://www.naseo.org.

Nexus Energyguide. Available from URL: http://www.
energyguide.com/default.asp.

Oak Ridge National Laboratory Buildings Technology
Center. Available from URL: http://www.ornl.gov/
ORNL/BTC.

Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Whole-wall thermal cal-
culator performance. Available from URL: http://www.
ornl.gov/roofs+walls/whole_wall/wall-a30.html.

Oikos. Whole wall R-value ratings. Energy Source
Builder #47; October 1996. Available from URL: http://
oikos.com/esb/47/wholewall.html.

RoofHelp.com. R-value. Available from URL: http://

www.roofhelp.com/Rvalue.htm.

9. US Environmental Protection Agency. What is Energy
Star? Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection
Agency; no date. Available from URL: http://www.
energystar.gov/index.cfm?c=about.ab_index.

Additional Sources of Information

Alliance to Save Energy. Save energy at home. Available
from URL: http://www.ase.org/section/_audience/educa-
tors/edsavhome/.

Christian J, Kosnay J. Home Calculating whole wall
R-values on the Net. Energy Magazine Online,
November/December 1999.

Energy Information Administration. Available from URL:
http://www.cia.doe.gov.

Environmental Solar Systems. Available from URL:
http://www.environmentalsolarsystems.com/systems/.

Enviro$en$e: Common sense solutions to environmental

problems. Available from URL: http://es.epa.gov/.

Florida Power and Light. Building shell: insulation.
Available from URL: http://www.fpl.com/savings/energy_
advisor/PA_45.html.

Florida Power and Light. Online home energy survey.
Available from URL: http://www.fpl.com/home/ohes/
contents/online_home_energy_survey.shtml.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
Highlights of the Energy Policy Act of 2003 and the
Energy Tax Incentives Act of 2003. Available from URL:
http://energy.senate.gov/news/rep_release.cfm?id=203374.

Trandt J. Americans want energy efficiency.
Available from URL: http://healthandenergy.com/energy_
efficiency.htm.

US Department of Energy, Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy. Building envelope. Available from
URL: http://www.eere.energy.gov/ EE/buildings_enve-
lope.html.

US Department of Energy, Energy Information
Administration. Available from URL: http://eia.doe.gov/.

US Environmental Protection Agency. Available from
URL: http://www.epa.gov.

US Environmental Protection Agency, Energy Star.

Available from URL: http://www.energystar.gov.

Wilson A. Thermal mass and R-value: making sense of a
confusing issue. EBN 1998 7(4). Available from URL:
http://www.buildinggreen.com/features/tm/thermal.cfm.

World Energy Efficiency Association. Available from
URL: http://www.weea.org/.

Chapter 13: Energy Efficiency 13-11



Page 594: 13-12 Chapter 13: Energy Efficiency Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 595: Chapter 14: Residential Swimming Pools and Spas

“Most people assume if their young child falls into the pool,
there will be lots of splashing and screaming, and plenty of
time to react. In reality, a child slips into the water and ofien
goes under the surface. These drownings can happen quickly
and silently-without warning.”

Hal Stratton, Chair
U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission,
2002—Present

Introduction

Swimming is one of the best forms of exercise available
and having a residential swimming pool also can provide
much pleasure. Nevertheless, it takes a great deal of work
and expense to make and keep the pool water clean and
free of floating debris. Without a doubt, a properly main-
tained and operated pool is quite rewarding. Home pools,
however, are sometimes referred to as attractive nuisances
or hazards. It is essential to be able to evaluate the risks
associated with a pool. A regulatory agent or consultant
must understand the total engineered pool system and be
capable of identifying all equipment, valves, and piping
systems. The piping system for a pool should be color-
coded to assist the pool operator or the owner to deter-
mine the correct way to operate the swimming pool. The
specific goal is to protect the owners, their families, and
others who may be attracted to a residential pool.

Residential pools and spas should provide clean, clear
water; water free of disease agents; and a safe recreational
environment. In addition, residential pools and spas
should have effective, properly operating equipment and
effective maintenance and operation.

Childproofing

Although it seems obvious, close supervision of young
children is vital for families with a residential pool. A
common scenario is a young child leaving the house
without the parent or caregiver realizing it. Children are
drawn to water, and they can drown even if they know
how to swim. All children should be supervised at all
times while in and around a pool.

The key to preventing pool tragedies is to provide layers
of protection. These layers include limiting pool access,
using pool alarms, closely supervising children, and being
prepared in case of an emergency. The U.S. Consumer
Product Safety Commission (CPSC) offers these tips to
prevent drowning:

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Fences and walls should be at least 4 feet high and
installed completely around the pool. The fence
should be no more than 2 inches above grade.
Openings in the fence should be a maximum of 4
inches. A fence should be difficult to climb over.

Fence gates should be self-closing and self-latching.
The latch should be out of a small child’s reach. The
gate should open away from the pool; the latch
should face the pool.

Any doors with direct pool access should have an
audible alarm that sounds for 30 seconds. The alarm
control must be a minimum of 54 inches high and
reset automatically.

If the house forms one side of the barrier to the pool,
then doors leading from the house to the pool should
be protected with alarms that produce a sound when

a door is opened.

Young children who have taken swimming lessons
should not be considered “drown proof”; young
children should always be watched carefully while
swimming.

A power safety cover—a motor-powered barrier that
can be placed over the water area—can be used when
the pool is not in use.

Rescue equipment and a telephone should be kept by
the pool; emergency numbers should be posted.
Knowing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) can
be a lifesaver.

For aboveground pools, steps and ladders should be
secured and locked or removed when the pool is not
in use.

Babysitters should be instructed about potential
hazards to young children in and around swimming
pools and their need for constant supervision.

Ifa child is missing, the pool should always be
checked first. Seconds count in preventing death or
disability.

Pool alarms can be used as an added precaution.
Underwater pool alarms can be used in conjunction
with power safety covers. CPSC advises consumers to
use remote alarm receivers so the alarm can be heard
inside the house or in other places away from the
pool area.

Chapter 14: Residential Swimming Pools and Spas 14-1



Page 596: Toys and flotation devices should be used in pools
only under supervision; they should not be used in
place of supervision.

Well-maintained rescue equipment (including a ring
buoy with an attached line and/or a shepherd’s crook
rescue pole should be kept by the pool.

Emergency procedures should be clearly written and
posted in the pool area.

All caregivers must know how to swim, know how to
get emergency help, and know CPR.

Children should be taught to swim (swimming classes
are not recommended for children under the age of
4 years) and should always swim with a buddy.

Alcohol should not be consumed during or just
before swimming or while supervising children.

To prevent choking, chewing gum and eating
should be avoided while swimming, diving, or
playing in water.

Water depth should be checked before entering a pool.
The American Red Cross recommends 9 feet as a
minimum depth for diving and jumping.

Rules should be posted in easily seen areas. Rules
should state “no running,” “no pushing,” no drinking,”
and “never swim alone.” Be sure to enforce the rules.

Tables, chairs, and other objects should be placed well
away from the pool fence to prevent children from
using them to climb into the pool area.

When the pool is not in use, all toys should be
removed to prevent children from playing with or
reaching for them and unintentionally falling into
the water.

A clear view of the pool from the house should be
ensured by removing vegetation and other obstacles
that block the view.

Hazards

Numerous issues need to be considered before building
residential pools: location of overhead power lines, instal-
lation and maintenance of ground fault circuit interrup-
tors, electrical system grounding, electrical wiring sizing,

location of the pool, and type of vegetation near the pool.

The commonly used solar covers that rest on the surface
of the pool and amplify sunlight do an excellent job of
increasing the pool temperature, and they also increase
the risk for drowning. If children or pets fall in and sink

14-2 Chapter 14: Residential Swimming Pools and Spas

below the cover, it can be nearly impenetrable if they
attempt to surface under it.

Winterizing the pool also can be hazardous. The pool
water in most belowground pools is seldom drained
because of groundwater pressure that can damage the
structure of the pool. Therefore, water in most home
pools is only lowered below the frost line for winter pro-
tection. In these cases, a pool cover is installed to keep
debris and leaves from filling the pool in the winter
months. The pool cover becomes an excellent mosquito-
breeding area before the pool is reopened in the spring
because of the decomposing vegetation that is on the pool
cover, the rain that accumulates on the top of the pool
cover during the winter, and the eggs laid on the pool
cover in early fall and early spring. The cover also pro-
vides ideal conditions for mosquitoes to breed: stagnant
water, protection from wind that can sink floating eggs,
the near absence of predators, and warm water created by
the pool cover collecting heat just below the surface
(Figure 14.1).

Public Health Issues

Current epidemiologic evidence indicates that correctly
constructed and operated swimming pools are not a
major public health problem. They are preferable to bath-
ing beaches because of the engineered controls designed
into pools. Poorly designed or operated pools, however,
can be major public health hazards. Data from CDC
between 1999 and 2000 show that 59 disease outbreaks
from 23 states were attributed to recreational water expo-
sure and affected an estimated 2,093 people. Of the 59
recreational outbreaks, 44 (74.6%) were of known infec-
tious etiology. Of the 36 outbreaks involving gastroenteri-
tis, 17 (47.2%) were caused by parasites; 9 (25.0%) by
bacteria; 3 (8.3%) by viruses; 1 (2.8%) by a combination
of parasites and bacteria, and the remaining 6 (16.7%)
were of unknown cause. Of the 23 nongastroenteritis-
related recreational outbreaks, seven were attributed to

Figure 14.1. Pool Cover

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 597: Pseudomonas aeruginosa, four to free-living amoebae,
one to Leptospira species, one to Legionella species, and
one to bromide. Sixteen of the 17 parasitic recreational
water outbreaks involving gastroenteritis; nine (24.3%)
were outbreaks of dermatitis; and six (16.2%) were
caused by Cryptosporidium parvum. The seventeenth
outbreak was caused by Giardia lamblia (intestinalis).
In 1999, an outbreak of Campylobacter jejuni was asso-
ciated with a private pool that did not have continuous
chlorine disinfection and reportedly had ducks swim-
ming in the pool [1].

Diseases
° Intestinal diseases: Escherichia coli O157:H7,

typhoid fever, paratyphoid fever, amoebic dysentery,
leptospirosis, cryptosporidiosis (highly chlorine
resistant), and bacillary dysentery can be a problem
where water is polluted by domestic or animal
sewage or waste. Swimming pools have also been
implicated in outbreaks of leptospirosis.

¢ Respiratory diseases: Colds, sinusitis, and septic
sore throat can spread more readily in swimming
areas as a result of close contact, or improperly
treated pool water, coupled with lowered resistance
because of exertion.

° Eye, ear, nose, throat, and skin infections: The
exposure of delicate mucous membranes, the
movement of harmful organisms into ear and nasal
passages, the excessive use of water-treatment
chemicals, and the presence of harmful agents in
water can contribute to eye, ear, nose, throat, and
skin infections. Close physical contact and the
presence of fomites (such as towels) also help to
spread athlete’s foot, impetigo, and dermatitis.

Injuries

Injuries and drowning deaths are by far the greatest problem
at swimming pools. Lack of bather supervision is a
prime cause, as is the improper construction, use, and
maintenance of equipment. Injuries include evisceration,

electrocution, entrapment, and entanglement. Some
particular problem areas include the following:

* loose or poorly located diving board,
* slippery decks or pool bottoms,
* poorly designed or located water slides,

* projecting or ungrated pipes and drains that can
catch hair or body parts,

e drain grates of inadequate size,

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

* improperly installed or maintained electrical
equipment, and

* improperly vented chlorinators and mishandled
chlorine materials.

Water Testing Equipment

It is essential that correct equipment be used and main-
tained for assessing the water quality of both swimming
pools and spas. The operators of pool and spas need to
monitor a wide range of chemicals that influence pool
operations and water quality. Their equipment should test
for chlorine, bromine, pH, alkalinity, hardness, and cyan-
uric acid build up. The chlorine should be measurable at
a range of 0 to 10 parts per million (ppm). Water pH lev-
els should be accurately measured with an acid or base
test. A kit to check pool chemical levels usually includes
N,N-diethyl-p-phenylene-diamine (DPD) tablet tests for
free and total chlorine, and other one-step tablet tests for
pH, total alkalinity, calcium hardness, and cyanuric acids.
The homeowner should determine acid or base demand
using an already reacted pH sample in dropper bottles.
Paper test strips with multiple tests (including chlorine,
bromine, and pH) are also available, but the reliability of
these tests varies greatly. If used, they should be kept
fresh, protected from heat and moisture, and checked
against other test systems periodically if water quality
problems persist.

Swimming pools are engineered systems, with demanding
safety and sanitary requirements that result in rather
sophisticated design standards and water treatment sys-
tems. The size, shape, and operating system of the pool is
based on the following considerations:

° the intended use of the pool and the maximum
expected bather loading;

* the selection of skimmers, scuppers, or gutters,
depending on the purpose, size, and shape of the pool;

* the recirculation pump, whose horsepower and
impeller configuration are based on the distance,
volume, and height of the water to be pumped;

© the filters, which are sized on the volume of water to
be treated and the maximum gallons (liters) of water
per minute that can be delivered by the pump and the
type of filter media selected; and

* the chemical feeder sizes and types, which are based on
the chemicals used, total quantity of the water in the
system, expected use rates, and external environmental
factors, such as quantity of sunlight and wind that
affect the system.

Chapter 14: Residential Swimming Pools and Spas 14-3



Page 598: Disinfection

The length of time it takes to disinfect a pool depends,
for example, on the type of fecal accident and the chlo-
rine levels chosen to disinfect the pool. If a fecal accident
is a formed stool, the faollowing chlorine levels will deter-
mine the times needed to inactivate Giardia:

Chlorine Levels (ppm) Disinfection Time

1.0 45 minutes
2.0 25 minutes
3.0 19 minutes

These times are based on a 99.9% inactivation of Giardia
cysts by chlorine, pH 7.5, and 77°F (25°C). The times
were derived from the EPA LTIESWTR Disinfection
Profiling and Benchmarking Technical Guidance Manual
[2]. These times do not take into account “dead spots”
and other areas of poor pool water mixing.

If the fecal accident is diarrhea, the following chlorine
levels will determine the times needed to inactivate

Cryptosporidia:

Disinfection Time

Chlorine Levels (ppm)

1.0 6.7 days
10.0 16 hours
20.0 8 hours

ACT value is the concentration (C) of free available
chlorine in parts per million (ppm) multiplied by the
time (T) in minutes (CT value = CxT ). The CT value
for Giardia is 45 and the value for Cryptosporidia is
9,600. If a different chlorine concentration or inactiva-
tion time is used, CT values must remain the same. For
example, to determine the length of time needed to disin-
fect a pool at 15 ppm after a diarrheal accident, the fol-
lowing formula is used: CxT = 9,600. Solve for time: T=
9,600+15 ppm = 10.7 hours. It would, thus, take 10.7
hours to inactivate Cryptosporidia at 15 ppm. You can do
the same for Giardia by using the CT of 45.

CDC has Web sites that contain excellent information
about safe swimming recommendations, recreational
water diseases, and disinfection procedures for fecal acci-

dents [3,4].

Content Turnover Rate

The number of times a pool’s contents can be filtered
though its filtration equipment in a 24-hour period is the
turnover rate of the pool. Because the filtered water is
diluted with the nonfiltered water of the pool, the turbid-

14-4 Chapter 14: Residential Swimming Pools and Spas

ity continually decreases. Once the pool water has
reached equilibrium with the sources of contamination, a
6-hour turnover rate will result in 98% clarification if the
pool is properly designed. A typical-use pool should have
a pump and filtration system capable of pumping the
entire contents of the pool though the filters every 6
hours. To determine compliance with this 6-hour turn-
over standard, the following formula is used:

Turnover rate = pool volume (gallons)/flow ratex60
(minutes in hour)

Following is a sample calculation of the pool content
turnover rate using the rate of flow reading from the
flow meter:

Turnover rate = 90,000 (gallons in pool)/
180 gallons per minutex60 (minutes in hour)

8.3-hour turnover rate = 90,000 (pool volume in
gallons)/10,800

The above pool would not meet the required turnover
rate of 6 hours. The cause could be improperly sized
piping or restrictions in the piping, an undersized pump,
or undersized or clogged filters. This turnover rate would
probably result in cloudy water if the pool is used at the
normal bather load. The decreased circulation would also
make it difficult for the disinfecting equipment to meet
the required levels.

Filters

Pool filters are not designed to remove bacteria, but to
make the water in the pool clear. Normal tap water looks
quite dingy if used to fill a pool and, in some cases, the
bottom of the pool is not visible. The maximum turbidity
level of a pool should be less than 0.5 nephelometric tur-
bidity units. Pool filters should be sized to ensure that the
complete contents of the pool pass through the filter once
every 6 hours. Home pools typically use one of three
types of filters.

High-rate Sand Filters

High-rate sand filters were introduced more than 30 years
ago and reduced the size of the conventional sand filter
by 80%. The sand filter is the most popular filter on the
market. High-rate sand filters use a silica sand that has
been strained to give it a uniform size. It is referred to as
pool-grade sand #20 silica. The sand is normally 0.45
millimeters (mm) to 0.55 mm in diameter. As water
passes through the filter, the sharp edges of the sand trap
the dirt from the pool water. When the backpressure of
the filter increases to 3 to 5 psi, the filter needs to be

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 599: cleaned. This is usually accomplished by reversing the
flow of the water through the filter and flushing the dirt
out the waste pipe until the water being discharged
appears clear. These filters perform best when used at
pressure levels below 15 to 20 gallons per minute,
depending on the manufacturer of the filter.

Cartridge Filters

Cartridge filters have been around for many years, but
only recently have gained in popularity in the pool indus-
try. They are similar to the filter on a car engine. The
water is passed through the cartridge and returned to the
pool. When the pressure of a cartridge filter increases
approximately 5 psi, the pump is turned off; and the top
of the filter is removed. The cartridge is removed and
either discarded and replaced or, in some cases, washed.

Diatomaceous Earth

Diatomaceous earth (DE) is a porous powder made from
the skeletons of billions of microscopic animals that were
buried millions of years ago. There are two primary types
of DE filters, but they both work the same way. Water
comes into the filter, passes through the DE, and is
returned to the pool. If properly sized and operated, DE
filters are considered by some to provide the highest qual-
ity of water. They are capable of filtering the smallest par-
ticle size of all the filter types. It is usually adequate to
change the DE once every 30 days. However, if your pool
water is very dirty, it is not uncommon to change it 3-4
times a day until the water is clear. The frequency of
backwashing will depend on many factors, including the
size of your filter, flow rate of your plumbing, and the
bather load in your pool. When the pressure reading on
the filter reaches the level set by the manufacturer’s man-
ual, it will be ready for backwashing.

Filter Loading Rates

The specification plate on the side of approved residential
or commercial swimming pool filters contains such
information as the manufacturer, type of filter, serial
number, surface area, and designed loading rate. Knowing
the surface area of the filter permits calculation of the
number of gallons flowing through the filter per minute.
An excessive flow rate can push the media into the pool
or force pool solids and materials thought the media,
resulting in turbid water. Figure 14.2 shows a typical
home pool treatment system. Regulations typically specify
how much water can be filtered through the various types
of pool filtration systems.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Disinfectants

Many disinfectants are used in pools and spas around the
world, including halogen-based compounds (chlorine,
bromine, iodine), ozone, and ultraviolet light with hydro-
gen peroxide. Those used most often are chlorine, bro-
mine, and iodine, and each has advantages and
limitations.

Chlorine— Pools can be disinfected with chlorine-releas-
ing compounds, including hypochlorite salt compounds.
Calcium hypochlorite is inexpensive and popular for
cold-water pools, but not suitable for hot pools and spas
because it will promote scaling on heat exchangers and
piping. Chlorine levels can be rapidly reduced with high
use and regular checks should be made to ensure mainte-
nance of disinfection. Some adjustment of pH is required
for most forms of chlorine disinfection. When chlorine
gas is used, a fairly high alkalinity needs to be maintained
to remove the acid formed during dosing [5]. Sodium
hypochlorite is a liquid chlorine, and has a pH of 13,
causing a slight increase in the pH of the pool water,
which should be adjusted with an acidic mixture. The
sun’s rays will degrade sodium hypochlorite. Chlorinated
isocyanate is available in three forms-granular, tablet, and
stick. The granular form contains 55%-62% available
chlorine and the stick and tablet form contain 89% avail-
able chlorine [6].

Figure 14.2. Typical Home Pool Equipment System

Chapter 14: Residential Swimming Pools and Spas 14-5



Page 600: Bromine—Bromine needs to be used at levels twice
those of chlorine to achieve similar disinfection. Bromine
is available as the sodium or potassium salts. In the pres-
ence of ammonia, bromine rapidly forms relatively unsta-
ble ammonia bromamines that possess disinfection
efficiencies comparable to that of free bromine. It is also
unnecessary to destroy ammonia bromamines because
they do not produce irritating odors [5].

Iodine—Potassium iodide is a white, crystal chemical.
This chemical needs an oxidizer, such as hypochlorite, to
react with organic debris and bacteria. Iodine does not
react with ammonia, hair, or bathing suits, or cause eye
irritation, but it can react with metals, producing green-
ish-colored pool water [6].

Ozone—O2zone is a very powerful oxidant and is effec-
tive against viruses. It can only be generated at the point
of use and commercial generation units are safe for use.
Ozone dosing is only practical where there is water circu-
lating off-pool because adequate ozone-water mixing is
essential for maximum oxidation. Ozone generators may
be of the ultraviolet lamp or corona discharge type. The
ultraviolet lamp efficiency reduces with time and the
lamp and associated activated charcoal filter will need
replacement [5].

Ultraviolet Light— Ultraviolet light, like ozone, is some-
times used for off-pool water disinfection. Ultraviolet
light has no effect on pH or color and has little effect on
the chemical composition of the water. However, color,
turbidity, and chemical composition of the water can
interfere with ultraviolet light transmission. The water
must be adequately treated before ultraviolet light expo-
sure. Hydrogen peroxide is often used for this purpose as
it is relatively safe in low concentrations, is nonflamma-
ble, and produces oxygen and water as end products. For
the ultraviolet light plus hydrogen peroxide system to be
effective, it must operate 24 hours a day. Ultraviolet light
disinfection is not pH dependent, but the addition of

hydrogen peroxide results in slightly acidic conditions [5].

Silver-copper Ionization—Sanitizing can be accom-
plished by using an ionizing unit that introduces silver
and copper ions into the water by electrolysis, or by pass-
ing an electric current through a silver and copper elec-
trode. The limiting factors in using this system in the
pool and spa are cost, slow bactericidal action, and poten-
tially high contaminant levels caused by bather loads.
Also, black spots can form on pool surfaces if the proper
parameters of water chemistry are not maintained. An
approved chemical disinfectant must be used with an ion-
izing unit [6].

14-6 Chapter 14: Residential Swimming Pools and Spas

The effective use of halogen disinfectants is based on the
pH, hardness, and alkalinity of the water. Improper pH,
hardness, and alkalinity levels in the pool can render high
levels of disinfectant useless in killing disease-causing
organisms. Table 14.1 summarizes water-quality problems
that affect pools and suggests corrective actions.

Effect of pH

The ideal pH to avoid eye irritation is 7.3. Bacteria- or
algae-killing effectiveness is improved with an even lower
pH. National standards typically recommend a range of
7.2 to 7.6, which is cost-effective. Table 14.2 demonstrates
the loss of disinfection as pH increases.

Chlorine Disinfectants

The options for selecting the form of chlorine disinfectant
to use in pools are quite varied, and the choices are com-
plex. Table 14.3 gives the properties of each form. Gas
chlorine costs the least, and the relative cost of each form
of chlorine increases as you move right across the table.
The cost of the disinfectant tends to be less the higher the
concentration of available chlorine. The safety issues are
more complex than they might appear. The hazards of gas
chlorine are well known. The solid forms of chlorine, such
as calcium hypochlorite, are quite reactive. When exposed
to organic compounds, they can generate a great deal of
heat and are potentially explosive. Because solid chlorine
seems inert to the untrained worker, it is often stored
beside motor oil or gasoline or left in where moisture can
start a chemical reaction. Even a pencil with a graphite
core that drops from a shirt pocket into a container of cal-
cium hypochlorite could result in a chemical reaction
leading to a fire that would release free chlorine gas [7].

The following chemical reactions produce chlorine by-
products that reduce the effectiveness of chlorine and
cause most eye irritation.

Cl, + H,O = HCl + HOCI

Chlorine + Water = Hydrochloric Acid +
Hypochlorous Acid

HOC! + NH; = H,O + NH,Cl
Hypochlorous Acid + Ammonia =
Water + Monochloramine

HOCI + NH,Cl = H,O + NHCL

Hypochlorous Acid + Monochloramine =
Water + Dichloramine

HOC! + NHCI, = H,O + NCI;

Hypochlorous Acid + Dichloramine =
Water + Nitrogen Trichloride

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 601: Tables 14.1-14.4 serve as a quick problem-solving reference for the home pool owner and operator.
The CDC Web site (www.cdc.gov/healthyswimming) provides a great deal of useful information for
both the inspector and the homeowner.

Water Quality Issue (Symptoms)
Air bubbles coming from inlets

Foam on water, around floating
objects, and on sides of pool

Cloudy water

Potential Problems (Root Causes)
1. Air in filter shell (easy fix)

2. Leak in hair and lint strainer, pipe,
valves, or fittings on suction side of
pump (may be difficult to fix)

. Low hardness of water (easy fix)

. Effect of algaecides (do not need)

. Spillage of detergent into pool

. Inadequate turnover rate

. Filter media corrupted, channeled, or
creviced.

. Excessive filter pressure.

4. High pH or alkalinity above 150 ppm.

Corrective Approaches (Actions)
1. Bleed air off of top of filter shell.

2. Check seal around opening of hair
and lint strainer. Locate leaking fitting
and seal.

. Maintain minimum of 200 ppm calcium
hardness, but less than 400 ppm.

. Do not use algaecides, but maintain 1
ppm of free chlorine at minimum and a
pH of 7.2-7.3. (pH of 7.2 is preferable)
for algae-free water.

. Backwash filters for extended time and
add makeup water. If foam is still a
problem, add defoaming agent.

. Check pump capacity and flow rate.

. If sand, clean filter and replace media,
if necessary. If diatomaceous earth (DE)
filter, wash filter bags in weak acid
solution.

. Backwash filter, bleed air pressure from
filter shell, check pump for proper
sizing.

4. Reduce pH to maximum of 7.6 and
alkalinity to less than 150 ppm.

Milky water (uniform water color
with white, opaque appearance)

Dull green color, varying density

Bright green color

Bluish green color

Reddish brown water, uniform in
color and texture

DE entering pool from DE filter leakage

Algae growth

Dissolved iron

Copper damage from low pH

Precipitated iron (ferrous)

Check filter bags for tears or holes and the
mounting of the bags on the filter septa.
Expect 24-hour minimum filtering to clear
water.

Super-chlorinate, then maintain pH at 7.6
(preferably 7.2) and disinfectant level of
1 ppm or higher.

Adjust pH to between 7.2 and 7.6, adjust
disinfectant level to between 1 and 1.5
ppm. Iron should precipitate to ferrous
state (brown); backwash repeatedly to
remove. Expect 24 to 46 hours of filtering
to clear water.

Raise pH to 7.6, increase hardness to
200 ppm and alkalinity to at least 150
ppm. Perform a saturation index calcula-
tion. Adjust water to slightly above +0.5
to achieve scale-forming water to isolate
before equipment damage.

Adjust pH and disinfectant level and back-
wash filter as needed until clear.

Table 14.1. Pool Water Quality Problem So

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

ving [7]

Chapter 14: Residential Swimming Pools and Spas

14-7



Page 602: HoCl <> H+

OC -

Hypochlorous Acid— Hypochlorite Ion—
More Increases Effectiveness More Reduces Effectiveness
[Percent of Chlorine as HOCL] Hydrogen Ion [pH] [Percent of Chlorine as OCI]

90 6.5 10
13. 7.0 fy]
66 7.2—IDEAL 34
45 7.6—IDEAL 55
21 8.0 79
10 8.5 90

Table 14.2. pH Effect on Chlorine Disinfection [7]

Gas Chlorine Sodium Hypochlorite

Calcium Hypochlorite Dichloro

Trichloro

Percent Chlorine 10-15 65-70 56-62 90

eect on pl
Sunlight Effects | Considerable Little loss Little loss
Physical Form Granular or tablets Granular only | Granular or tablets

Table 14.3. Chlorine Use in Swimming Pools

Pool Water Hardness and Alkalinity

The ideal range of water hardness for a plaster pool is 200
to 275 ppm. The ideal range for a vinyl, painted, or fiber-
glass surface is 175 to 225 ppm. Excess hardness causes
scaling, discoloration, and filter inefficiency. Less than
recommended hardness results in corrosion of most con-
tact surfaces.

Alkalinity should be 80 to 120 ppm. High alkaline levels
cause scale and high chlorine demand. Low levels cause
unstable pH. Sodium bicarbonate will raise the alkalinity
level. The pool water will be cloudy if alkalinity is over
200 ppm.

Liquid Chemical Feeders

Positive Displacement Pump

A positive displacement pump is preferable to erosion dis-
infectant feeders. Positive displacement pumps can be set
to administer varied and specific chemical dosage rates to
ensure that a pool does not become contaminated with
harmful microorganisms. A positive displacement pump
does need routine cleaning, descaling, and servicing.
Running a weak muratic acid or vinegar solution through
the pump weekly can minimize most major servicing of the
pump. Most service on the pump involves one of four areas:

14-8 Chapter 14: Residential Swimming Pools and Spas

1. the check valves are scaled, their springs are weak,
or valves are no longer flexible;

2. the diaphragm is cracked, leaking, or not flexible;

3. the drive cam needs replacement or requires
adjustment; or

4. the motor requires replacement.

Erosion and Flow-through Disinfectant Feeders

These feeders work by the action of water moving around
a solid cake of chlorine and eroding the cake. The feeders
work quite well for smaller pools, but require consider-
able care and maintenance. The variables that affect the
effectiveness of erosion feeders are

1. solubility of the chlorine cake or tablet;
surface area of the cake or tablet;
amount of water flowing around the cake or tablet;

concentration of chlorine in the cake or tablet; and

“Pe YS

number of cakes or tablets in the feeder.

Note: For safety reasons, the disinfectant cake must not
be accessible.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 603: Minimum Ideal
Water Clarity

Crystal-clear water at | Main drain
all times is the goal isi

Crystal clear,
object the size
of a dime eas-
ily seen from
pool deck at
main drain,
water sparkles

Maximum

None

Comments

Lack of clarity is often due to malfunctioning
or undersized filters. Other problems may be
improperly sized pump, air collecting in the
filter shell, or operator not running filter 24
hours per day.

Disinfectant Levels | [PP

Free chlorine
Standard pool

Wading or shallow
pool for children

4 4 4 Continuous levels at 1 to 1.5 ppm minimum.

3 3 3 Super-chlorinate indicators: high chlorine
level, eye irritation, or algae growth.
Super-chlorinate indicators: High chlorine
levels, eye irritation or algae growth.
— levels.

Bromine

Wading or shallow | 4
pool for children

Iodine ppm

Chemical Values

Consult product
manufacturer

Hardness, CaCO 150 200-400 500+ If difficult to control, use a different
disinfectant.

Heavy metals

Stabilizer,
cyanuric acid

None None None Check algaecide for heavy metal presence or
by-products of corrosion (partial water
replacement may be recommended).

10 30-50 100 If level exceeds 100 ppm, partial water
replacement recommended.

Algae, bacteria None Shock treat and maintain required levels of
disinfectant and 7.2 to 7.6 pH.

Table 14.4. Swimming Pool Operating Parameters [7]

Spas and Hot Tubs

Hot tubs (large tubs filled with hot water for one or more
people) or spas (a tub with aerating or swirling water) are
used for pleasure and are increasingly being recom-
mended for therapy. The complexity of these devices
increases with each new model manufactured. Newer
models often have both ozone and ultraviolet light emit-
ters for enhanced disinfection (see Disinfectants section
earlier in this chapter). However, the environment of the
spa and hot tub, if not cleaned and operated correctly,
can become a culture medium for microorganisms.
Because the warm water is at the ideal temperature for
growth of microorganisms, good disinfection is critical.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Table 14.5 provides suggested hot tub and spa operating
parameters. It is essential that all equipment works prop-
erly and that the units are cleaned and disinfected on a
routine basis. Monitoring the water temperature is very
important and, depending on the health of the user, can
be a matter of life and death. Time in the heated water
should be limited, and the temperature for pregnant users
should be below 103°F (39°C) to protect the unborn
baby.

Chapter 14: Residential Swimming Pools and Spas 14-9



Page 604: Minimum (ppm) Ideal (ppm) Maximum (ppm) Comments

Disinfectant Levels

: Continuous levels. Super-chlorinate when
Free chlorine 3 4 combined level exceeds 0.2.

10
Combined 0.5 Super-chlorinate indicators: High chlorine
chlorine , levels, eye irritation or algae growth.

Bromine 4 10 Continuous levels.

Consult product

Iodine ppm manufacturer

Ozone, ultraviolet also requires a disinfectant in most
light, hydrogen Consult product th jurisdictions.

peroxide, and manufacturer
others

Chemical Values

pH 7.2 73 7.6 Ideal range: 7.2-7.6.

Total alkalinity,
CaCO;

Excess solids many lead to hazy water and
Dissolved solids corrosion of fixtures (may need partial
water replacement).

If difficult to control, use a different

Hardness, CaCO; 200-400 disinfectant.

Check algaecide for heavy metal presence or
Heavy metals by-products of corrosion (partial water
replacement may be required).

Stabilizer, If level exceeds 100 ppm, partial water
cyanuric acid replacement may be required.

If observed, shock treat and maintain
Algae, bacteria required levels of disinfectant and the
appropriate pH.

Table 14.5. Spa and Hot Tub Operating Parameters [7]

References 3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Healthy

1. Lee HL, Levy DA, Craun GE Beach MJ, Calderon RL. swimming. Atlanta: US Department of Health and
Surveillance for waterborne-disease outbreaks—United Human Services; no date. Available from URL:
States, 1999-2000. MMWR 2002; 51 (SS08):1-28. hieepe//www.ode.gov/healthyswimming/.
Available from URL: http://www.cde.gov/mmwr/preview/ 4, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Fecal
mmwrhtml/ss5108al.htm. accidents response recommendations for aquatics staff.

2. US Environmental Protection Agency. LTIESWTR Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human Services;
Disinfection profiling and benchmarking: technical no date. Available from URL: http://www.cde.gov/

guidance manual. Washington, DC: US Environmental healthyswimming/fecalacc.htm.

Protection Agency; 2003. Available from URL: http://
www.epa.gov/safewater/mdbp/pdf/profile/It] profiling. pdf.

14-10 Chapter 14: Residential Swimming Pools and Spas Healthy Housing Reference Manual



Page 605: 5. Broadbent C. Guidance on water quality for heated spas.
Rundle Mall, South Australia, Australia: Public
Environmental Health Service; 1996. Available from
URL: http://www.dh.sa.gov.au/pehs/publications/
monograph-heated-spas.pdf-

6. Michigan State University Pesticide Education Program.
Swimming pool pest management: category 5A, a training
guide for commercial pesticide applicators and swimming
pool operators. Chapter 3: pool disinfectants and pH. East
Lansing, MI: Michigan State University; no date. Available
from URL: http://www.pested.msu.edu/BullSlideNews/
bulletins/pdf/2621/E2621chap3.pdf.

7. National Swimming Pool Foundation. Certified pool-spa
operator handbook, 2004. Colorado Springs, CO:
National Swimming Pool Foundation; 2004. Available
from URL: http://nspforg.

Additional Sources of Information

American Academy of Pediatrics. Available from URL:
www.aap.org.

American National Standards Institute. Available from
URL: http://www.ansi.org.

American Red Cross. Available from URL:
www.redcross.org.

American Trauma Society. Available from URL:
www.amtrauma.org.

Association of Pool and Spa Professionals. Available from
URL: http://www.nspi.org/.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National
Center for Injury Prevention and Control. Available from
URL: www.cdc.gov/ncipe/factsheets/drown.htm.

For more information about the CDC fecal accident
recommendations, go to URL: http://www.cde.gov/

healthyswimming/fecal_response.htm.

For additional information about cryptosporidiosis,
go to URL: http://www.cdc.gov/healthyswimming/

cryptofacts.htm.

See also Web-based Injury Statistics Query and
Reporting System (WISQARS) [Online]. (2002).
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Available
from URL: www.cdc.gov/ncipce/wisqars.

Healthy Housing Reference Manual

Children’s Safety Network. Available from URL:
http://www.childrenssafetynetwork.org.

Chlorine Institute, Inc. Available from URL:
http://www.cl2.com.

National Safe Kids Campaign. Available from URL:
http://www.safekids.org.

National Safety Council. Available from URL:
http://www.nsc.org/.

National Swimming Pool Foundation. Available from
URL: http://www.nspf.com/.

Think First National Injury Foundation. Available from
URL: http://www.thinkfirst.org.

US Consumer Product Safety Commission. Available
from URL: http://www.cpsc.gov.

Chapter 14: Residential Swimming Pools and Spas 14-11



